=== PAPER: P06-B2tree-Schmeisser2022
=== FILENAME: B2-Tree - Page-Based String Indexing in Concurrent Environments.pdf
=== PAGES: 12

--- PAGE 1 ---
SCHWERPUNKTBEITRAG
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13222-022-00409-y
Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
B2-Tree: Page-Based String Indexing in Concurrent Environments
Josef Schmeißer1 · Maximilian E. Schüle1 · Viktor Leis2 · Thomas Neumann1 ·A l f o n sK e m p e r1
Received: 30 January 2021 / Accepted: 5 January 2022 / Published online: 21 February 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Recently proposed index structures, that combine trie-based and comparison-ba sed search mechanisms, considerably
improve retrieval throughput for in-memory database systems. However, most of these index structures allocate small
memory chunks when required. This stands in contrast to block-based index structures, that are necessary for disk-accesses
of beyond main-memory database systems such as Umbra. We therefore present the B
2-tree. The outer structure is identical
to that of an ordinary B+-tree. It still stores elements in a dense array in sorted order, enabling efﬁcient range scan
operations. However, B 2-tree is composed of multiple trees, each page inte grates another trie-based search tree, which
is used to determine a small memory region where a sought entry may be found. An embedded tree thereby consists
of decision nodes, which operate on a single byte at a time, and span nodes, which are used to store common preﬁxes.
This architecture usually accesses fewer cache lines than a vanilla B+-tre e as shown in our performance evaluation.
As a result, the B
2-tree answers point queri es considerably faster. Concurrent access to B 2-tree pages are managed by
an optimistic locking protocol which results in high utilization of the available hardware resources. Our evaluation of
read-write workloads attests more than competitive performance for the B
2-tree compared to a traditional B+-tree.
Keywords Indexing · B-tree · String
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
Low overhead buffer managers are a fairly recent devel-
opment which provide in-memory performance in case the
data does ﬁt into RAM [ 1, 2]. However, database systems
based on such a low overhead buffer manager still require
efﬁcient index structures which harness this new architec-
/envelopebackJosef Schmeißer
josef.schmeisser@tum.de
Maximilian E. Schüle
m.schuele@tum.de
Viktor Leis
viktor.leis@fau.de
Thomas Neumann
neumann@in.tum.de
Alfons Kemper
kemper@in.tum.de
1 Chair for Database Systems, TU Munich,
Boltzmannstraße 3, 85748 Garching, Germany
2 Chair of Computer Science 6, Friedrich–Alexander University
Erlangen–Nürnberg, Martensstraße 3, 91058 Erlangen,
Germany
ture. While systems like HyPer [ 3]o rT a r d i s D B[4, 5] could
use pure in-memory based index structures, like the Adap-
tive Radix Tree (ART) [ 6] or the more recent Height Op-
timized Trie (HOT) [ 7], these are no longer an option for
Umbra [ 2]. Pure in-memory index structures usually offer
better performance than various B-tree ﬂavors, yet their ten-
dency to allocate small varying sized memory chunks limits
their range of applicability.
With the presentation of LeanStore [ 1], Leis et al. revis-
ited the role of buffer managers. LeanStore is a storage en-
gine designed to resolve the overhead issues of traditional
buffer management architectures [ 8]. Its main feature is
to abandon a hash table based pinning architecture, which
buffer managers usually use, in favor of a technique called
pointer swizzling [9]. Umbra’s buffer manager extends this
concept by the ability to serve variable-sized pages with
a minimum page size of 64 KiB [ 2]. This obviously affects
the architectural requirements imposed on index structures.
The imposed constraint precludes the use of most state-of-
art pure in-memory based index structures. B-trees and their
variations, on the other hand, ﬁt well into Umbra’s architec-
ture. However, we found that even a highly optimized B+-
tree implementation is no longer competitive, with regard to
string indexing, in comparison to index structures like ART
K

--- PAGE 2 ---
12 Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
Fig. 1 The B2-tree consists of decision nodes, similar to B+-tree nodes
that contain separators and pointers to sub-nodes, and span nodes for
common preﬁxes
and HOT. Our previously proposed B 2-tree [ 10] operates
on top of Umbra’s buffer manager and provides signiﬁcant
throughput improvements over the original Umbra B+-tree.
Fig. 1 shows a small B 2-tree. It hosts an embedded tree
per B-tree page. This embedded tree serves the purpose
of directing incoming searches into narrowed down search
spaces. A search on the embedded tree yields a pair of slot
indices which deﬁne a span wherein a sought key may be
found. Circular nodes point to the beginning of a search
range, the upper bound. Each search space is also high-
lighted by the distinct coloring of its records and the corre-
sponding node within the embedded tree.
Modern CPU architectures usually provide three layers
of cache between their registers and main memory in or-
der to mitigate the imbalance between CPU performance
and main memory latency [ 11]. Performing a naïve binary
search over all the entries stored on a reasonably large
B-tree page usually results in high lookup costs. This is
especially the case when the B-tree page is used to store
variable-sized records. On e of the main reasons is the bi-
nary search’s tendency to produce cache-unfriendly mem-
ory access patterns and its relatively high amount of branch
mispredictions during the search [ 6]. Some approaches try
to mitigate these effects by using smaller nodes, often as
small as a single cache line, wh ich are optimized for cache
hierarchies of modern processors [ 11–13]. However, de-
creasing the page size down to the size of a single cache
line may be infeasible or at least undesirable. Letting the
storage backend handle such small pages would also lead to
a considerable overhead. In the end, the choice of a certain
page size will always be a trade-off.
We argue, that traditional index-structures for disk-based
database systems can be adapted for beyond main-memory
database systems. This work focuses on the development
of an index structure based on the versatile B-tree lay-
out. Thereby, we try to resolve the previously stated cache-
unfriendliness of most B-trees variants. The presented ap-
proach hence aims to increase the number of successful
cache accesses by applying data access patterns with higher
locality. Our approach utilizes a secondary embedded index
contained within each page. This secondary index is used to
direct incoming searches to narrow down the search space
within a given page. Consequently, fewer cache lines will
be accessed during the search. We have chosen to retain
the B+-tree [ 14] leaf layout, where keys are stored sequen-
tially in accordance to their ord ering. This allows us also to
maintain the usual strength of B+-trees—their high range
scan throughput.
This work’s main contributions are:
/CIRCLEthe B2-tree, a disk-based index structure tuned for cache-
friendly, page-local lookups,
/CIRCLEthe adaption of radix trees to disk-based index structures,
/CIRCLEand a comparison to the alr eady optimized Umbra B+-
tree.
/CIRCLEa novel analysis of the B 2-tree in concurrent usage sce-
narios.
The focus of this work lies on the development of an
index structure operating on given pages administered by
Umbra’s buffer manager. Concurrency is another aspect,
our proposal utilizes an optimistic synchronization tech-
nique [ 15], namely Optimistic Lock Coupling (OLC) [ 16].
This work is structured as follows: Sect. 2 gives a sum-
mary of related work on modern index structures. Sect. 3
introduces the B
2-tree, which consists of the description of
span and decision nodes as well as insertion and retrieval
algorithms. Finally, Sect. 4 compares our proposed index
structure to Umbra’s B+-tree.
2 Related Work
While there has been constant development and research
in the area of index structure s, recent approaches mainly
focus on main-memory database systems. Many of those
index structures are therefore not designed to be used in
conjunction with a paging based storage engine, however,
their general design may still provide valuable insight.
There are a couple of proposals which aim to improve
the cache-friendliness of B-trees. One of which is the Cache
Sensitive B+-Tree (CSB+-Tree) [ 12]. Completely different
approaches are the so-calle d Cache-Oblivious B-tree and
the Cache-Oblivious string B-tree [ 17, 18]. Both propos-
als are based on an important building block, the packed-
memory array (PMA). The PMA maintains its elements
in physically sorted order, however, elements are not or-
ganized in a dense manner, instead, empty spaces will be
deployed as necessary [ 19].
K

--- PAGE 3 ---
Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22 13
The String B-Tree is a B-tree speciﬁcally optimized to
manage unbounded-length strings [ 20] while minimizing
disk I/O. It is composed of Patricia tries [ 21] as internal
nodes where each Patricia trie node stores only the branch-
ing character. This architecture enables the use of a con-
stant fanout independent of the lengths of the referenced
strings since the Patricia trie leafs only store logical point-
ers. For this reason, searches w ithin the String B-Tree have
to progress optimistically. A search may thereby initially
yield a result which does not match the queried key. By
comparing the resulting string with the actual query, the
length of the longest common preﬁx will be determined.
This information is then used to ﬁnd the corresponding
node within the Patricia trie in question. From there on
the correct path based on the actual difference between the
resulting string and the queried key will be taken.
Additionally, the choice of a concrete binary search im-
plementation also plays an important role. Index structures
which depend heavily on binary search, like B-trees, require
an efﬁcient implementation thereof to achieve the best pos-
sible performance. Khuong and Morin suggest the use of
their branch-free binary search implementation for arrays
smaller than the size of the L2 cache [ 22].
Masstree is another key-value store that has mainly been
designed to provide fast operations on symmetric multipro-
cessing (SMP) architectures [ 23]. It stores all data in main
memory, hence it is constructed to be used within the con-
text of main-memory databas e system. Masstree’s design
resembles a trie [ 24, 25] data structure with embedded B+-
trees as trie nodes.
3T h e B 2-tree
The B2-tree is a variation of the classic B-tree, its core struc-
ture is based on the B+-tree layout. We extend the existing
layout by embedding another tree into each page, as empha-
sized by the name B 2-tree. The term embedded tree refers
to this tree structure, it serves the purpose of improving
the lookup performance while maintaining minimal impact
on the size consumption as well as on the throughput of in-
sert and delete operations. Our implementation also features
some commonly known optimization techniques like the
derivation of a shortened separator during a split [ 26–28].
Other approaches that combine or nest different index
structures have already proved their potential. Masstree
for instance showed considerable performance improve-
ments [ 23]. However, Masstree is not designed to be used
in conjunction with paging base d storage engines. Another
point of concern is the direct correlation between the outer
trie height and the indexed data. The inﬂexible maximum
span length of eight bytes may lead to a relatively low uti-
lization and fanout of the lower tree levels when indexing
strings, this is usually caused by the sparse distribution
of characters found in string keys. This is not unique to
Masstree: ART’s fanout on lower tree levels also decreases
in such usage scenarios [ 7]. B+-trees on the other hand
feature a uniform tree height by design, since the tree
height does not depend on the data distribution. Compari-
son-based index structures suc h as the B+-tree on the other
hand are often outperformed by trie-based indexes in point
accesses [ 7].
Our approach intends to combine the beneﬁts of both
worlds, the uniform tree height of B+-trees with the trie-
based lookup mechanics, while still featuring a page based
architecture. Our trie-based embedded tree on each page
serves the purpose of determining a limited search space
where the corresponding queried key may reside. However,
we still utilize a comparison-based search on these limited
subranges. This design aims to improve the general cache-
friendliness of the search procedure on each page.
3.1 The Embedded Tree
In the following we will present the inner page layout of our
B2-tree, the general outline can be observed in Fig. 2.A s
already mentioned, the general page organization follows
the common B+-tree architectur e, hence, payloads are only
stored in leaf nodes. Leaf nodes are also interlinked, like it
is originally the case in a B+-tree, in order to maintain the
high range scan throughput usually achieved by B+-trees.
The embedded tree itself is composed of a couple of dif-
ferent node types. First, we deﬁne the decision node, it acts
like a B-tree node by directing incoming queries onto the
corresponding child. Probably the main difference to a B-
tree node, is the fact that these nodes operate on a ﬁxed size
decision boundary represented by a single byte in our im-
plementation, in contrast to B+-tree nodes, which usually
operate on multiple bytes at once. We hence decompose
keys into smaller units of information similar to how the
trie data structure operates [ 24, 25]. Nodes of this decision
type direct the search to the ﬁrst child where the currently
investigated byte of the sear ch key is less or equal to the
separator. The fanout of this type of node is also limited in
order to improve data locality. Another similarity to B-tree
nodes is the fact that they can be hierarchically arranged
just like B-tree nodes. This node type bears some similar-
ity to the branch node found in Patricia tries [ 21]. However,
Patricia’s branch nodes only compare for equality, our deci-
sion nodes use the range of bytes to determine the position
of a corresponding child. In Fig. 2 this type is illustrated
as divided rectangular shape. Fig. 3 illustrates the memory
layout for this node type. Note that, inner decision nodes
and their leaf counterparts share the same layout, they just
differ in the interpretation of their two byte large payloads.
Leaf nodes terminate the search for a queried key even if it
K

--- PAGE 4 ---
14 Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
Fig. 2 The embedded tree structure together with an array responsible for translating the values stored in the embedded tree (the ri ) into search
ranges where sought key-value pairs may reside. Its values are the exclusive upper bounds of offsets j for the rightmost table (page entries). The
grayish virtual nodes are not part of the physically stored tree structur e. Empty search ranges are omitted in the rightmost table. This table shows
the complete form of the stored keys, without their associated payload
is not fully processed, the remainder of a queried key will
then be further processed by the subsequent comparison
based search.
The second node type we deﬁne are span nodes.T h e s e
store the byte sequence which forms the longest common
preﬁx found in the subtree rooted at the current node. Their
memory layout is shown in Fig. 3. This node type can be
compared to the extension concept of the Patricia trie [ 21],
however, span nodes have two additional outgoing edges to
handle non-equality. Note that, by using an order preserving
storage layout for the nodes, there is no necessity to store
any next pointer within the span node, since the child node
will directly succeed the span node. In Fig. 2 span nodes
are illustrated as rounded rectangles. The deployment of
span nodes is necessary to advance the queried key past the
length of a span if the current subtree has a common preﬁx.
At the following key depth, decisions, whether a queried
Fig. 3 Memory layout of all the embedded nodes deployed by B 2-tree.
Each node contains a one byte large header. A ﬂag inside the header
determines whether a node contains pointers to subtrees or references
to search ranges
key is part of a certain range, can be made once again by
the deployment of decision nodes.
Obviously, the content of a span node does not have to
match the corresponding excerpt of the queried key exactly.
In case the stored span does not match, three scenarios can
occur. Firstly, the size of the span may actually exceed the
queried key. In that case the input will be logically padded
with zero bytes. This may lead to the second case where the
input is shorter. Any further comparisons with subsequent
nodes are therefore meaningless. Hence, we introduce the
concept of a virtual edge pointing from each span to its
leftmost child, a so-called virtual node . To the edge itself
we will refer as minimum edge.I nF i g .2 such an edge and
its corresponding node is always colored gray to emphasize
the aspect that it is not part of the physical tree structure. We
follow this edge every time the input is less than the content
of the span node. Note that encountering a fully processed
input key implies that the minimum edge of a span node has
to be taken. Fig. 2 illustrates the usage of this concept with
the insertion of the Wikipedia URL after the construction
of the embedded tree. This URL does not match the second
span node, hence, it is delegated to the virtual node labeled
“3”.
The last case where the input is greater than the span
node’s content is completely symmetrical to the minimum
edge situation. Therefore, a second virtual edge and node
pair exists for every span node to handle the greater than
case. We will cover the algorithmic details more elaborately
in Sect. 3.2.
Fig. 2 also illustrates the range array, which stores the
positions of key-value pairs. These deﬁne limited search
spaces on the page. This array s erves two purposes. First,
it eliminates the need to alter the actual contents of the
embedded tree during insert and removal operations, this
simpliﬁes modiﬁcation operations signiﬁcantly. Second, it
enables the use of the aforementioned minimum and max-
imum edges.
K

--- PAGE 5 ---
Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22 15
During a lookup on a page this array is used to translate
the output ri of a query on the embedded tree into a posi-
tion j on the actual page. Each lookup on the embedded
tree itself yields an index into this array. This array, on
the other hand, contains indices into the page indirection
vector [ 29], whereas the indirection vector itself points to
any data that does not ﬁt into a slot within the indirection
vector [ 29]. A resulting index thereby speciﬁes an upper
limit for the search of a queried key, whereas the directly
preceding element speciﬁes the lower limit. In Fig. 2 the
annotated positions are colored differently in accordance to
their origin. The very ﬁrst position is colored green, this
special element ensures that the lower limit for a search
can always be determined. Indices originating from virtual
edges are colored gray, whereas blue is used for regular
positions. We denote these indices as r
i where i represents
the corresponding position within the array of preﬁx sums.
Each r
i occupies two bytes within each leaf node, the mem-
ory layout is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Insertion and removal operations, which are to be per-
formed on the overlying page, also affect the embedded
tree. More precisely, this affects the search range given by
the embedded tree where the actual operation took place
and all subsequent search ranges, since adjusting an up-
per boundary of one particular search range also implies
that subsequent search ranges have to be shifted in order
to retain their original limits. This is achieved by simply
adjusting the values within the range array for the directly
affected search range and eve ry following search range.
3.1.1 Construction
One aspect we have not covered so far is the construction
of the embedded tree structure. The construction routine
is triggered each time a page is split or merged and also
periodically depending on the number of changes since the
last invocation.
The construction routine always starts by determining
the longest common preﬁx of the given range of entries be-
ginning at the very ﬁrst byte of each entry. We will refer to
the position of the currently investigated byte as key depth,
which is zero within the context of the ﬁrst invocation. On
the ﬁrst invocation, this spans the entire range entries on
the current page. Based on the length of the longest com-
mon preﬁx a root node will be created. If the length of
the longest common preﬁx is zero, a decision node will be
created, else a span node. In the latter case, the newly cre-
ated node contains the string forming the longest common
preﬁx. Afterwards, the construction routine recurses by in-
creasing the key depth to shift the observation point past
the length of the longest common preﬁx.
The creation of a decision node is more involved, here
we investigate the byte at the current key depth of the key
in the middle of the given range. Subsequently, with the
concrete value of this byte, a search on the entries right
to that key is performed. This search determines the lower
bound key index with regard to that value at the current key
depth. In some cases, the resulting index may lie right at the
upper limit of the given key range. For this reason, we also
search in the opposite direction and take the index which
divides the provided range of keys more evenly. This pro-
cedure is repeated on both resulting subranges until either
the size of a subranges falls below a certain threshold or un-
til the physical node structure of the current decision node
does not contain enough space to accommodate another en-
try. Once a decision node is constructed, the construction
routine recurses on each subrange, however, this time the
key depth remains unchanged. This process is repeated un-
til each ﬁnal subrange is at most as large as our threshold
value.
3.2 Key Lookup
On the page level, the general lookup principle is performed
as in a regular B+-tree. The only difference is the applied
search procedure. We start by querying the embedded tree
which yields an upper limit for the search on the page
records within the indirection vector. With the upper limit
known, the lower limit can be obtained by fetching the
previous entry from the range array. Afterwards, a regu-
lar binary search on the limited range of entries will be
performed.
Querying the embedded tree not only yields the search
range but also further information about the queried key’s
relationship to the largest common preﬁx prevailing in the
resulting search range. The concrete relationship is encoded
in skip, the stored value corresponds to the length of the
largest common preﬁx within the returned search range.
It also indicates that the key’s preﬁx is equivalent to this
largest common preﬁx. This information can be exhibited
to optimize the subsequent search procedure by only com-
paring the sufﬁxes.
Algorithm 1 depicts a recursive formulation of the em-
bedded tree traversal algorithm. It inspects each incoming
node whether it is a span node or not. We compare the
stored span with the corresponding key excerpt at the posi-
tion deﬁned by skip, in case a span node is encountered.
The difference between the stored span and the key excerpt
will be the result of this comparison. We also determine
whether the key is fully processed in this step, meaning
that the byte sequence stored within the span node exceeds
the remaining input key. Three cases have to be differenti-
ated at this point.
Firstly, the obtained difference stored in diff may be
greater than zero, hence, the span did not match. How-
ever, this also implies that the remaining subtree cannot be
K

--- PAGE 6 ---
16 Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
evaluated for this particular input key. One of the outgoing
virtual edges must therefore be taken. Implementation-
wise, this edge is realized by a call to MaximumLeaf.
It traverses the remaining subtree by choosing the edges
corresponding to the largest values. The ﬁnal result is thus
the rightmost node of the remaining subtree.
The second case, where the excerpt of the input key is
smaller, is mostly analog. However, the condition must now
not only include the result, whether diff is smaller than
zero, but also the result, whether the input key has been fully
processed during the span comparison or not. An input key
that is shorter than the sum of all span nodes, which led to
the key’s destination search range, will be logically padded
with zeros. This leads to another interesting observation.
Consider two keys with different lengths and their largest
common preﬁx being the comple te ﬁrst key, all remaining
bytes of the second key are set to zero. The index structure
has to be able to handle both keys. However, from the point
of view of the embedded tree, both keys will be considered
as equal. This also implies that the embedded structure has
to ensure that both keys will be mapped into the same search
range. It is therefore up to the construction procedure to
handle such situations accordi ngly. The subse quent binary
search has to handle everything from there on.
The third and last case, where the key excerpt matches
the span node, should be the usual outcome for most in-
put keys. We obviously have to account for the actual
length of the span to advance the queried key beyond this
byte sequence. Hence, the point of observation on the key
has to be shifted accordingly. This is also the case where
skip is adjusted accordingly. It holds the accumulated
length of all span nodes which were encountered during
the lookup, or an invalid value if one of the span nodes did
not match or more precisely if diff evaluated to a non-
zero value. The subsequent call to either MaximumLeaf
or MinimumLeaf thereupon returns an invalid value for
the skip entry in the result tuple.
3.3 Key Insertion
We have already brieﬂy discussed, how the insertion of new
entries, affects the embedded t ree, and its yielded results.
Two cases have to be addressed. Either there is enough free
space on the affected page to accommodate the insertion
of a new entry, or the space does not sufﬁce. A new entry
can be inserted as usual if the page has enough free space
left. However, this will also require some value adjustments
within the range array in order to reﬂect the change. The
latter case, where the page does not hold enough free space
for the new entry, will lead to a page split. Splitting a page
additionally results in roughly half of the embedded tree
being obsolete.
For a simple insertion that does not lead to a page split,
updating the embedded tree is trivial. We ﬁrst determine the
affected r
i in the range array where the insertion takes place.
The updated search range is then deﬁned by the preceding
value and the value at ri , which has to be incremented,
since the search range grew by exactly one entry. In Fig. 2
these index values are denoted as j , and they are stored
within the range array. However, this change must also be
reﬂected in all subsequent sear ch ranges. Therefore, all the
following entries within the range array have to be incre-
mented as well, in order to point to their original elements.
By conducting this change, subs equent index values will
then span all the original s earch spaces, which were valid
up to the point where the insertion occurred.
The case where an insertion triggers a page split has to
be handled differently. A split usually implies that approx-
imately half of the embedded tree represents the entries on
the original page whereas the other half would represent
the entries on the newly created page. Consequently, the
index values deﬁning the search ranges of one page are
now obsolete. Although, the structure could be updated to
correctly represent the new s tate of both pages, we instead
opted to reconstruct the embedded trees. This allows us
to utilize the embedded structure to a higher degree, since
the current prevailing state of both pages can be captured
more accurately. Having a newl y split page also ensures
that roughly half of the available space is used. We can
thus construct a more efﬁcient embedded tree, which spec-
iﬁes smaller search ranges. In turn, smaller ranges can be
used to direct incoming s earches more efﬁciently.
K

--- PAGE 7 ---
Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22 17
3.4 Key Deletion
Deletion is handled mostly analogously. However, the re-
peated deletion of entries, which deﬁne the border between
two ranges, may lead to empty ranges. This is no issue per
se: The subsequently executed search routine just has to
handle such a scenario accordingly. As it is the case with
insertions, the deletion of entries also requires further ac-
tions. Directly affected sear ch ranges have to be resized
accordingly. Hence, the corresponding j values within the
range array have to be decremented in order to reﬂect those
changes. All subsequent values also have to be decremented
in order to point to their original elements on the page.
3.5 Space Requirements
Another interesting aspect is the space requirement of the
embedded tree structure. In the following we will analyze
the worst-case space consumption in that regard. We start
by determining an upper bound for the space consumption
of a path through the embedded tree to its corresponding
section of the page which deﬁnes a search range.
For now, we only consider the space required by the
structure itself, not the contents of span nodes. The com-
plete length of all the contents of span nodes forms the
longest common preﬁx of a certain page section, which
our second part of this analysis takes into account. Further-
more, a node in the context of the following ﬁrst part refers
to a compound construction of a decision node and a zero-
length span node, this represents the worst-case space con-
sumption scenario, where each decision node is followed by
a span. Similar to the analysis of ART’s worst-case space
consumption per key [ 6], a space budget b.n/ in byte for
each node n is deﬁned. This budget has to accommodate
the size required by the embedded tree to encode the path
to that section. x denotes the worst-case space consumption
for a path through the embedded tree in byte. The total bud-
get for a tree is recursively given by the sum of the budgets
of its children minus the ﬁxed space s.n/ required for the
node itself. Formally, the budget for a tree rooted in n, can
be deﬁned as
b.n/ =
(x isTerminal.n/P
c2children.n/
b.c/ − s.n/ else.
Hypothesis: 8n W b.n/ /NAKx.
Proof Let b.n/ /NAKx. We give a proof by induction over the
length of a path through the tree.
Base case: The base case for the terminal node n, i.e.a page
section, is trivially fulﬁlled since b.n/ = x.
Inductive step:
b.n/ =
X
c2children.n/
b.c/ − s.n/
/NAK b.c1/ + b.c2/„ ƒ‚ …
at least two children per node
− x
/NAK2x − x = x (induction hypothesis).
Conclusion: Since both cases have been proved as true,
by mathematical induction the statement b.n/ /NAKx holds
for every node n. /ETX
An upper bound for the payload of the span nodes is
obtained by assigning the complete size of the preﬁx of
each section to the section its elf. Assigning the complete
preﬁx directly to a section implies that the embedded tree
does not use snippets of the complete preﬁx for multiple
sections, therefore, each span node has a direct correlation
with a search range deﬁned by the embedded tree. The
absence of shared span nodes, thus, maximizes the space
consumption for the embedded tree. An upper bound for
the space consumption of the embedded tree is given by
X
r2searchRanges.p/
.l.r / + x/
where l.r/ yields the size of the longest common preﬁx
of the search range r within page p.
We can therefore conclude that the additional space re-
quired by the embedded tree mostly depends on the choice
of how many search ranges are created and the size of
common preﬁxes within them. Our choice of roughly 32
elements per search range yielded the optimal result on all
tested datasets, however, this is a parameter which may re-
quire further tuning in different scenarios. In our setting,
the space consumption of the embedded structure never ex-
ceeded 0.5 percent of the page. Note that, the preﬁx of
each key within the same search range does not have to be
stored, the B
2-tree may therefore also be used to compress
the stored keys.
In the following we will analyze how modern CPUs may
beneﬁt from B 2-tree’s architecture. Both AMD’s and Intel’s
current x86 lineup feature L1 data caches with a size of
32 KiB, 8-way associativity, and 64-byte cache-lines. Our
previous worst-case space consumption showed that the size
of the embedded tree is mostly inﬂuenced by the size of
common preﬁxes. The constant parameter x, on the other
hand, can be set to 15, which is the size of a decision node
and an empty span node. With the aforementioned setup
of 32 elements per search range and a page size of 64 KiB,
we can assume that the embedded structure, excluding span
nodes, ﬁts into a couple of cache lines, our evaluation also
supports this assumption.
K

--- PAGE 8 ---
18 Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
Efﬁcient lookups within the limited search ranges are the
second important objective of our approach. With the indi-
rection vector being the entry point for the subsequent bi-
nary search, it is beneﬁcial to prefetch most of the accessed
slots. In our implementation, each slot within the indirec-
tion vector occupies exactly 12 bytes. Therefore, with 32
elements per search range, only six cache-lines are required
to accommodate the entire sectio n of the indirection vector.
Recall that it is a common optim ization strategy to store
the preﬁx of a key within the indirection vector as unsigned
integer variable. The B
2-tree, however, utilizes this space to
store a substring of each key s ince the preﬁxes are already
part of the embedded tree. We will refer to this substring
as inﬁx. It can also be observed that the stored inﬁx val-
ues within the indirection vector are usually more decisive,
since the embedded tree already conﬁrmed the equality for
all the preﬁx bytes. Overall, this implies that fewer indi-
rection steps, to fetch the remainder of a key, have to be
taken.
3.6 Concurrency
B2-tree was designed with concurrent access via optimistic
latching approaches taken into consideration. While this ap-
proach adapts well to most vanilla B-tree implementations,
other architectures may require additional logic. This sec-
tion covers all necessary adaptions and changes required by
the B
2-tree in order to ensure correctness in the presence of
concurrent accesses.
Optimistic latching approaches often require additional
checks in order to guarantee thread safety. Leis et al. [ 16]
list two issues that may arise through the use of specu-
latively locking techniques such as OLC. The ﬁrst aspect
concerns the validity of memory accesses. Any pointer ob-
tained during a speculative read may point to an invalid
address due to concurrent write operations to the pointer’s
source. Readers have hence to ensure that the read pointer
value was obtained through a safe state. This issue can
be prevented by the introduction of additional validation
checks. Before accessing the a ddress of a speculatively ob-
tained pointer, the reader has to compare its stored lock
version with the version currently stored within the node.
Any information obtained before the validation has to be
considered as invalid if those versions differ. Usually, an
operation will be restarted upon encountering such a situa-
tion.
Secondly, algorithms have to be designed in a manner
that their termination is guaranteed under the presence of
write operations performed by interleaving threads. Leis
et al. discuss one potential issue concerning the intra-node
binary search implementation as such. They note that its de-
sign has to ensure that the search loop can terminate under
the presence of concurrent writes [ 16]. Optimistically oper-
ating algorithms, therefore, have to ensure that no accesses
without any validation to speculatively obtained pointers
are performed and that termination under the presence of
concurrent writes is guaranteed.
However, the presented traversal algorithm does not
guarantee termination without the introduction of further
logic. One main aspect concerns the observation that span
nodes can contain arbitrary byte sequences. It is hence
possible to construct a key containing a byte sequence that
resembles a valid node. Such a node may also contain links
pointing to itself. An incoming searcher may then end up
in a cycle due to previous modiﬁcations performed by an
interleaving writer which had conducted modiﬁcations to
the embedded structure in said manner.
To prevent issues such as the one described, certain
countermeasures have to be taken. We have to ensure that
the traversal progresses with every new node. Furthermore,
node pointers must not exceed the boundary of their con-
taining page. We could have used the validation scheme
presented by Leis et al. [ 16]. This would require a valida-
tion on the optimistic lock’s version after each node fetch.
However, we can also use the fact, that in our implemen-
tation each parent node has a smaller address than any of
its children. We furthermore have to ensure that each ob-
tained node pointer lies within the boundary of the current
page. Note that any search range obtained through the em-
bedded tree is also a possible candidate leading to invalid
reads. We hence have to ensure that each obtained bound-
ary value also lies within the boundary of the currently
processed page. Our binary s earch implementation, which
will be performed directly afterwards, trivially fulﬁlls the
previously described termination requirement.
Insert and delete operations do not require any further
validation steps, since they do not depend on any unval-
idated speculative reads and exclusive locks will be held
during such operations anyway.
4E v a l u a t i o n
In the following we evaluate various aspects of our B 2-tree
and compare them to the Umbra B+-tree. Note that the
Umbra B+-tree is our only reference due to the lack of any
other page based index structure capable of running on top
of Umbra’s buffer manager. In the following we analyze
B
2-tree’s performance as well as its scalability, the space
requirements for the embedded tree, and the time required
to construct the embedded tree.
4.1 Experimental Setup
All the following experiments were conducted on an Intel
Core i9 7900X CPU at stock frequency paired with 128 GB
K

--- PAGE 9 ---
Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22 19
Fig. 4 Single-threaded through-
put comparison of the B 2-tree
and the Umbra B+-tree grouped
by the used dataset and imposed
workload. a Lookup throughput
in million operations per second,
b Insert thr oughput in m illion
operations per second
a
b
Table 1 Parameters of the used datasets
Distinct
count
Average
length
Median
length
Min
length
Max
length
Wikipedia 48 454 094 21.82 17 1 257
Random 30 000 000 68.00 68 8 128
URL 6393703 62.14 59 14 343
of DDR4 RAM. Furthermore, index structures do not have
to access background memory, everything will be kept in
main memory, unless otherwise stated. B2-tree as well as the
standard B+-tree have been compiled to use 64 KiB pages
which is the smallest page size Umbra’s buffer manager
provides. The evaluation system runs on Linux with GCC
9.3, which has been used to compile all index structures.
Our reference will be the Umbra B+-tree as already
stated. This particular B+-tree implementation uses some
commonly known optimizations like the choice of the
smallest possible separator within the neighborhood of sep-
arators around the middle of each page, and a data locality
optimization where the ﬁrst bytes of each key are stored
within its corresponding entry in the indirection vector
[27–29].
4.2 Datasets
We have used a couple of different datasets in our evalu-
ation. Those datasets were c hosen to resemble real-world
workloads to a certain degree. Indexing of URLs and En-
glish Wikipedia titles 1 should resemble real-world scenar-
ios. We also included a completely synthetic dataset consist-
ing of randomly drawn strings, this dataset will be denoted
as Random dataset.
Table 1 summarizes some of the most important charac-
teristics of the used datasets. The Random dataset is gener-
ated by a procedure which generates each string by drawing
values from two random distributions. Thereby, the ﬁrst dis-
1 https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/20190901/enwiki-20190901-
all-titles.gz.
tribution determines the length of the string which is about
to be generated. Subsequently, the second distribution is
used to draw every single character in sequence until the
ﬁnal destination length is reached.
4.3 Lookup Performance
In the following we will compare the point lookup through-
put of our B
2-tree against our reference. The lookup bench-
mark queries each key from the randomly shufﬂed dataset
which has been used for the construction of the index itself.
Fig. 4a summarizes the results of our string lookup bench-
mark whereas Fig. 4b shows the inﬂuence of B 2-tree’s more
efﬁcient lookup approach onto the insert throughput. B 2-
tree’s lookup throughput is roughly twice as high as that
of its direct competitor. Keys in the URL and Wikipedia
datasets often share large common preﬁxes, discriminative
bits are therefore often not part of the integer ﬁeld within
the indirection vector of Umbr a’s B+-tree. In these situa-
tions, the B
2-tree has an advantage since the entries within
the indirection vector are more likely to contain discrim-
inative bits. The Random dataset, on the other hand, fea-
tures very short common preﬁxes and a larger amount of
discriminative bits between the bit string representation of
keys. It is therefore not surprising that the performance gap
between the Umbra B+-tree and our B
2-tree is smaller on
this dataset.
Recording performance counters during experiments
usually facilitates further insights, Table 2 therefore con-
tains an exhaustive summary. Comparing the averaged
amount of instructions required per lookup between the
B+-tree and our B
2-tree already reveals a considerable
advantage in favor of the latter approach. This advantage
also exists between the observed amount of L1 data cache
misses (L1D-Miss) and las t level cache misses (LLC-
Miss), where the latter metric reveals that the standard
B+-tree produces roughly twice as many misses. This is
most likely related to the red esigned search procedure.
Thereby, binary search is performed on a smaller search
range. Furthermore, the contents of the inﬁx ﬁelds within
K

--- PAGE 10 ---
20 Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
Table 2 Performance counters per lookup operation. The best entry in each case is highlighted in bold type. B 2-tree mostly dominates the Umbra
B+-tree which is in accordance with the previously discussed throughput numbers
Approach Inst. IPC L1D-Miss LLC-Miss BR-Miss
Random B2-tree 1402 0.39 38.32 10.17 15.9
Umbra B+-tree 2519 0.51 44.63 20.02 19.84
URL B2-tree 1839 0.49 45.69 11.35 22.74
Umbra B+-tree 3382 0.51 79.58 28.88 16.15
Wikipedia B2-tree 1593 0.38 46.02 13.84 22.76
Umbra B+-tree 3147 0.43 61.7 30.82 28.22
the indirection vector are usu ally more decisive than the
contents wherein stored by t he Umbra B+-tree. As a result,
the comparison procedure, which will be invoked by the
binary search procedure, can often refrain from performing
any comparisons on the sufﬁxes stored within the area
where the remainder of the records are stored. This also
reduces the total amount of cache accesses. For the B
2-
tree one might expect fewer branch mispredictions, since
the inﬁx values are usually more decisive, however, the
metric for the amount of mispredicted branches (BR-Miss)
per lookup reveals no signiﬁcant differences between both
approaches. This is most likely the result of the additional
logic performed during the lookups on the embedded tree.
4.4 Concurrent Workloads
Additionally, to evaluating B 2-tree’s single-threaded point
lookup and insert throughput, we also analyzed its behav-
ior in concurrent settings. For this experiment we utilize
the same datasets and settings as in the previous single
threaded analysis. Umbra’s buffer manager was again con-
ﬁgured with a memory-pool large enough to accommodate
all pages in main-memory, thus eliminating any demand to
access background storage.
Fig. 5 Throughput of operations
on a mixed workload consisting
of 95 percent lookup and ﬁve
percent insertion operations.
The top row depicts the absolute
results whereas the bottom
row shows the relative speedup
achieved B
2-tree in comparison
to Umbra’s B+-tree
Previous experiments only dealt with single threaded
workloads, in the following, however, we analyze the be-
havior of both index structures under varying degrees of
parallelization. To be precise, we increase the number of
active threads while maintaining a constant insert to lookup
ratio. The workload of this experiment consists of 95 per-
cent lookups with the remaining percentage accounting for
insert operations. Furthermore, each corresponding index
structure is pre-initialized with 50 percent of the keys be-
longing to the current dataset, leaving the remaining entries
for the actual benchmark. The benchmark itself starts by
launching a ﬁxed number of threads, where each thread
conducts one of the aforementi oned operations. Just before
an operation is performed, a thread either picks a lookup or
an insert operation with its respective probability. This pro-
cess is repeated until all remai ning elements of the dataset
in question are inserted.
Fig. 5 depicts the results of this experiment for each
dataset. Overall, the B
2-tree again outperforms the Umbra
B+-tree, as in previous experiments. The relative speedup
shown in the second row of Fig. 5 reveals that both ap-
proaches scale very similarl y. This can be expected since
both index structures utilize the same optimistic locking
protocol. Previous scalability analyses have shown that read
K

--- PAGE 11 ---
Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22 21
Fig. 6 Lookup throughput on the URL dataset with index structures
utilizing Umbra’s buffer manager
as well as write workloads scale considerably well under
the utilization of OLC [16]. So it does not come at a surprise
that this is also the case for these two index structures.
However, concerning the relative speedup, there are
slight differences that are related to the occupation of
physical CPU cores and the utilization of Hyperthreads.
Our results may even suggest that the regular B+-tree im-
plementation scales better on certain workloads, like the
Wikipedia titles and URL dataset, since the relative speedup
shows a slightly decreasing trend on those. The B
2-tree,
on the other hand, appears to better utilize Hyperthreads
as the relative speedup incr eases when the actual thread
count surpasses the number of available physical cores,
thus leading to the scheduling onto logical Hyperthreads.
4.5 Throughput With Page Swapping
The experiment was set up as follows: in the ﬁrst phase,
all the keys of the Wikipedia titles were inserted into an
empty index structure. If necessary, pages were swapped
out into a temporary in-memory ﬁle by the buffer manager.
In the second phase, the retrieval time for each key of the
randomly shufﬂed input was measured.
Fig. 6 shows the results of the comparison between
these two index structures depending on the percentage of
swapped out pages. The B
2-tree outperforms the Umbra
B+-tree for every tested percentage of swapped out pages.
However, note that both curves eventually converge as the
workloads become increasingly I/O bound.
4.6 Space Consumption
Another important aspect of the presented approach is the
total amount of additionally required space on each page.
Recall that we use 64 KiB large pages. We were able to ﬁt
the complete embedded tree structure in just a couple of
hundred bytes as Fig. 3 afﬁrms.
The space utilization of the embedded tree has therefore
never been a source of concern in our point of view. How-
Table 3 Averaged space consumption for the complete embedded tree
in percent of the page size
Dataset Size [%]
Wikipedia titles 0.48
Random strings 0.49
URLs 0.52
ever, it should be noted that the size of the embedded tree
is variable, and that it will be inﬂuenced by the structure
of the input data. Especially long shared preﬁxes have an
impact on the overall space consumption of the embedded
tree.
5C o n c l u s i o n
We presented the B 2-tree which speeds up lookup op-
erations by embedding an additional tree into each tree
node. The B 2-tree showed considerable performance im-
provements in comparison to an optimized B+-tree. This
is related to the total number of instructions required
per lookup, which in this case is lower than the number
required by the Umbra B+-tree. Our B
2-tree, therefore,
provides considerable improvements regarding the point
lookup throughput. The overhead inﬂicted by the construc-
tion of an embedded tree during each page split is no
point of concern as our experimental analysis showed. Fur-
thermore, the additional space required for the embedded
structure is mostly negligible, as our evaluation conﬁrmed.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL.
Competing interests Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view
a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.
0/.
References
1. Leis V , Haubenschild M, Kemper A, Neumann T (2018) Leanstore:
In-memory data management beyond main memory. In: Proceed-
ings of ICDE 2018, pp 185–196 https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.
2018.00026
2. Neumann T, Freitag MJ (2020) Umbra: A disk-based system with
in-memory performance. In: Proceedings of CIDR 2020
K

--- PAGE 12 ---
22 Datenbank Spektrum (2022) 22:11–22
3. Kemper A, Neumann T (2011) Hyper: A hybrid oltp&olap main
memory database system based on virtual memory snapshots. In:
Proceedings of ICDE 2013, pp 195–206 https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICDE.2011.5767867
4. Schüle ME, Karnowski L, Schmeißer J, Kleiner B, Kemper A, Neu-
mann T (2019) V ersioning in Main-Memory Database Systems:
From MusaeusDB to TardisDB. In: SSDBM, pp 169–180
5. Schüle ME, Schmeißer J, Blum T, Kemper A, Neumann T (2021)
TardisDB: Extending SQL to Support V ersioning. In: SIGMOD
Conference, pp 2775–2778
6. Leis V , Kemper A, Neumann T (2013) The adaptive radix tree: Art-
ful indexing for main-memory databases. In: Proceedings of ICDE
2013, pp 38–49 https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2013.6544812
7. Binna R, Zangerle E, Pichl M, Specht G, Leis V (2018) HOT: A
height optimized trie index for main-memory database systems.
In: Proceedings of SIGMOD 2018, pp 521–534 https://doi.org/10.
1145/3183713.3196896
8. Harizopoulos S, Abadi DJ, Madden S, Stonebraker M (2008) OLTP
through the looking glass, and what we found there. In: Proceedings
of SIGMOD 2008, pp 981–992 https://doi.org/10.1145/1376616.
1376713
9. Garcia-Molina JWH, Ullman JD, Widom J (2009) Database sys-
tems the complete book second edition
10. Schmeißer J, Schüle ME, Leis V , Neumann T, Kemper A (2021) B
2-
Tree: Cache-Friendly String Indexing within B-Trees. In: Sattler K-
U, Herschel M, Lehner W (eds) BTW 2021, pp 39–58. https://doi.
org/10.18420/btw2021-02
11. Samuel ML, Pedersen AU, Bonnet P (2005) Making csb+-tree
processor conscious. In: Workshop on Data Management on New
Hardware, DaMoN 2005, Ba ltimore, Maryla nd, USA, June 12,
2005
12. Jin R, Chung TS (2010) Node compression techniques based on
cache-sensitive b+-tree. In: 9th IEEE/ACIS ICIS 2010, pp 133–138
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIS.2010.9
13. Rao J, Ross KA (1999) Cache conscious indexing for decision-sup-
port in main memory. In: Proceedings of VLDB 1999, pp 78–89
14. Comer D (1979) Ubiquitous b-tree. ACM Comput Surv 11(2):121–
137. https://doi.org/10.1145/356770.356776
15. Cha SK, Hwang S, Kim K, Kwon K (2001) Cache-conscious con-
currency control of main-memory indexes on shared-memory mul-
tiprocessor systems. In: Proceedings of VLDB 2001, pp 181–190
16. Leis V , Haubenschild M, Neumann T (2019) Optimistic lock cou-
pling: A scalable and efﬁcient general-purpose synchronization
method. IEEE Data Eng Bull 42(1):73–84
17. Bender MA, Demaine ED, Farach-Colton M (2005) Cache-obliv-
ious b-trees. SIAM J Comput 35(2):341–358. https://doi.org/10.
1137/S0097539701389956
18. Bender MA, Farach-Colton M, Kuszmaul BC (2006) Cache-obliv-
ious string b-trees. In: Proceedings of SIGMOD 2006, pp 233–242
https://doi.org/10.1145/1142351.1142385
19. Bender MA, Hu H (2007) An adaptive packed-memory array. ACM
Trans Database Syst 32(4):26. https://doi.org/10.1145/1292609.
1292616
20. Ferragina P , Grossi R (1999) The string b-tree: A new data structure
for string search in external memory and its applications. J ACM
46(2):236–280. https://doi.org/10.1145/301970.301973
21. Morrison DR (1968) Patricia—Practical algorithm to retrieve infor-
mation coded in alphanumeric. J ACM 15(4):514–534. https://doi.
org/10.1145/321479.321481
22. Khuong PV , Morin P (2017) Array layouts for comparison-based
searching. ACM J Exp Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3053370
23. Mao Y , Kohler E, Morris RT (2012) Cache craftiness for fast
multicore key-value storage. In: Pro ceedings of EuroSys 2012, pp
183–196 https://doi.org/10.1145/2168836.2168855
24. Briandais RDL (1959) File searching using variable length keys. In:
Papers presented at the the March 3-5, 1959, western joint computer
conference, pp 295–298
25. Fredkin E (1960) Trie memory. In: CACM
26. Galakatos A, Markovitch M, Binnig C, Fonseca R, Kraska T (2019)
FITing-Tree: A Data-aware Index S tructure. In: SIGMOD Confer-
ence, pp 1189–1206. https://doi.org/10.1145/3299869.3319860
27. Graefe G (2011) Modern b-tree techniques. Found Trends Databases
3(4):203–402. https://doi.org/10.1561/1900000028
28. Graefe G, Larson PÅ (2001) B-tree indexes and CPU caches. In:
Georgakopoulos D, Buchmann A (eds) IEEE Data Eng. 2001, pp
349–358 https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2001.914847
29. Graefe G (2006) B-tree indexes, interpolation search, and skew. In:
Workshop on Data Management on New Hardware, DaMoN 2006,
p5 https://doi.org/10.1145/1140402.1140409
K
