=== PAPER: P14-Samuel2005
=== FILENAME: Making CSB+-Trees Processor Conscious - Paper.pdf
=== PAGES: 7

--- PAGE 1 ---
/u.sc/n.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/i.sc/t.sc/y.sc /o.sc/f.sc /c.sc/o.sc/p.sc/e.sc/n.sc/h.sc/a.sc/g.sc/e.sc/n.sc 
Københavns Universitet
Making CSB+-Tree Processor Conscious
Samuel, Michael; Pedersen, Anders Uhl; Bonnet, Philippe
Published in:
First International Workshop on Data Management on New Hardware
Publication date:
2005
Document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Citation for published version (APA):
Samuel, M., Pedersen, A. U., & Bonnet, P. (2005). Making CSB+-Tree Processor Conscious. In First
International Workshop on Data Management on New Hardware ACM.
Download date: 04. May. 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Making CSB+-Trees Processor Conscious 
Michael Samuel 
University of Copenhagen 
Universitetsparken 1 
2100 Copenhagen - Danmark 
mrml@diku.dk 
Anders Uhl Pedersen 
University of Copenhagen 
Universitetsparken 1 
2100 Copenhagen - Danmark  
aborq@diku.dk 
Philippe Bonnet 
University of Copenhagen 
Universitetsparken 1 
2100 Copenhagen - Danmark  
bonnet@diku.dk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Cache-conscious indexes, such as  CSB+-tree, are sensitive to the 
underlying processor architecture. In  this paper, we focus on how 
to adapt the CSB+-tree so that it performs well on a range of 
different processor architectures. Previous work has focused on 
the impact of node size on the pe rformance of the CSB+-tree. We 
argue that it is necessary to consider a larger group of parameters 
in order to adapt CSB+-tree to processor architectures as different 
as Pentium and Itanium. We iden tify this group of parameters and 
study how it impacts the performan ce of CSB+-tree on Itanium 2. 
Finally, we propose a systematic method for adapting CSB+-tree 
to new platforms. This work is a first step towards integrating 
CSB+-tree in MySQL’s heap storage manager. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.2.2 [ Database Management ]: Access Methods; C.4 
[Performance of Systems]: Design Studies.   
General Terms 
Performance, Design, Measurement. 
Keywords 
Index, Cache-conscious, B+-tree. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Cache conscious indexes, such as  the CSB+-tree, were proposed 
by the database research commun ity to reduce the amount of data 
cache misses and thus speed up the performance of main memory 
databases on modern processors [1][ 2][3].  It has been shown that 
the CSB+-tree outperforms both the classical B+-tree and the T-
Tree [4]. But the fact is that commercial databases do not 
integrate cache-conscious access methods. General-purpose 
database systems rely on indexes to speed up disk accesses and 
TimesTen, which is a main-memory database system, relies on T-
Tree. 
The advent of a commercially vi able open source database makes 
it possible for the research community to integrate this technology 
into an actual product. In the context of the Badger project 1, we 
are integrating the CSB+-tree in the heap storage manager of 
MySQL
2. The heap storage manager is specifically used for 
main-memory tables. It relies on hash indexes and Red-Black 
trees as access methods. Table locks are used to ensure 
concurrency control and there are no durability guarantees.  The 
heap storage manager is an ideal framework for integrating the 
CSB+-tree. The key issue is to make sure that our CSB+-tree 
implementation performs well on all the platforms MySQL is 
ported to. 
Let us start by reviewing how performance is measured in main 
memory. The traditional metric is response time, which is the sum 
of processor compute time and wait time, where wait time is due 
to data cache misses, instruction cache misses, branch 
mispredictions and architecture specific stalls [5].  Our goal is to 
minimize wait time on a given processor. 
Can we implement a version of the CSB+-tree that performs well 
regardless of the underlying pro cessor characteristics? Hankins 
and Patel [6] showed that the performance of the CSB+-tree is 
sensitive to processor and operating system characteristics. They 
proposed a model of execution tim e and show that there is a 
trade-off between the number of cache misses, the number of 
instructions executed, the num ber of conditional branches 
mispredicted, and the number of TLB misses
3. Processors with 
different instruction sets, cache hierarchy or pipelining model 
offer different trade-offs. CSB+-tree thus has to be adapted to 
perform well on a given processor. 
Now, the question is: How to adapt CSB+-tree to the underlying 
processor characteristics? Hankins and Patel focused on the 
impact of node size on performan ce [6] and showed that large 
nodes are advantageous. The model and the conclusions from 
Hankins and Patel were validated on a 32 bits Pentium processor. 
Are they still valid on a 64 bits It anium 2? Are there parameters, 
beyond node size, that need to be adapted when porting the 
CSB+-tree to a new platform? Itanium 2 supports a very efficient 
prefetching mechanism that could impact the search strategy and 
potentially make linear search within a node more appropriate 
than binary search.  
 
 
Copyright is held by the author/owner. 
First International Workshop on the Data Management on New 
Hardware (DaMoN 2005), 
June 12, 2004, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 
                                                                 
1 http://www.distlab.dk/badger/ 
2 See the MySQL documentation at http://www.mysql.com/ 
3 TLB stands for translation look-aside buffer. This buffer is used 
by the operating system when translating a virtual memory 
address into a physical memory address.  
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
In this paper, we focus on CSB+ -tree parameters and how to set 
them in order to speed up performances on a given processor. We 
do not give an analytical mode l of how CSB+-tree parameters 
impact performance. Instead, we take a holistic approach: We rely 
on a set of experiments to find out the optimal combination of 
parameters on a given platform. More specifically, our 
contribution is the following: 
1. We review the parameters of the CSB+-tree and identify 
those parameters that are sensitive to processor 
characteristics.   
2. We define a set of experi ments that illustrate how those 
parameters impact the performance of the CSB+-tree on an 
Itanium 2 processor. In particular, we show that linear search 
is consistently more effective than binary search as an 
internal node search strategy. 
3. Finally, we present a systematic method for adapting the 
CSB+-tree parameters on a give n platform. This method is 
based on experimentation. 
This work was motivated by our focus on the performance of 
MySQL on Itanium 2 in the context of the Gelato federation
4 
[7,8].  
2. CSB+-Tree Parameters 
The CSB+-tree is an adaptation of the classical B+-tree [9]: it is a 
balanced tree where leaf-nodes store (key,pointer) pairs pointing 
to data. The key observation that underlies the design of the B+-
tree is that pointers inside non-leaf nodes are an obstacle to cache-
efficient node traversal: They take up space and thus cause data 
cache misses. Consequently, non-leaf nodes only contain one 
pointer in the CSB+-tree. Keys are packed together, making node 
search more cache effective. All the children of a given non-leaf 
node are allocated together contiguously in memory into a node 
group. The child node associated to a given key is identified by 
the pointer to its node group and an offset corresponding to the 
ordinal number of the key in the parent node. 
Based on the original paper from Rao and Ross [2], it is 
straightforward to identify a set of  parameters for the CSB+-tree. 
The first group of parameters is related to the index structure: 
• Node size: While Rao and Ross proposed to set the node size 
equal to the cache line size, Hankins and Patel showed that 
this choice might be suboptimal [6]. Node size impacts the 
performance of internal node search as well as node splitting. 
It is thus a central parameter of the CSB+-tree. 
• Key size: Rao and Ross considered a fixed 4 byte key size. 
Key size should be variable so that it can be fixed at index 
creation time based on the type of the key.  
• Pointer size: Pointer size is fixed to the processor word size: 
4B on a 32 bits processor and 8B on a 64 bits processor. 
Pointer size thus trivially depends on the processor 
architecture. 
• Number of keys per node : Key size together with node size 
define the theoretical maxi mum number of keys per node. 
This is an important parameter as it determines the tree fan-
                                                                 
4 The Gelato Federation is an open source community sponsored 
by HP, Intel and SGI to promote Linux on Itanium 2. 
www.gelato.org 
out (the higher fan out, the fewer levels in the CSB+-tree) 
and the overhead of the data structure (the more keys per 
nodes, the lower the overhead of the node structure and of 
the pointers it contains). The actual maximum number of 
keys per node should be fixed by a tunable fill factor. 
The second group of parameters is related to the operations on the 
index structure: 
• Bulkload: A first bulkloading method consists of inserting 
sorted leaf entries from the rightmost path in the CSB+-tree. 
A more effective alternative c onsists of building the tree, 
level by level.  
• Search:  Search within a CSB+-tree is similar to search 
within a B+-tree. The crucial issue is to find the leftmost key 
larger than or equal to the search key in a given node. Rao 
and Ross identify binary search as a basic approach to 
searching within a node. They also propose an optimization 
based on loop unrolling. Note that loop unrolling of the 
binary search code is only possible if node size and key size 
are known at compile time. An alte rnative to binary search is 
a plain linear search. A processor such as Itanium 2 provides 
an elaborate prefetching mechanism that might make linear 
search a reasonable choice. More generally, the processor 
architecture impacts the number of instruction stalls and 
branch mispredictions when searching within a node.  
• Insertion: As in the B+-tree, insertion consists of a search 
followed by a key insertion. Node split is necessary if there 
is not enough room in the leaf node. Such node splits require 
allocating space for the new nodes and copying of data 
between nodes. The basic, segmented and full variants of the 
CSB+-tree offer different desi gn choices in terms of node 
allocation (dynamic vs. static) and the amount of data that 
needs to be copied during node split. 
• Deletion: Rao and Ross identify two deletion policies. One 
consists of reorganizing nodes as keys are deleted in order to 
maintain a given fill factor, the other denoted as lazy consists 
of removing keys without reorganizing the tree. 
Search is the only operation directly affected by the processor 
architecture. The design choices  for bulkload, insertion and 
deletion are based on a processor oblivious space vs. time trade-
off.  
When adapting CSB+-tree to a given processor architecture, the 
crucial parameters are: 
• Node size: a multiple of the cache line size. 
• Number of keys per node : a combination of node size, key 
size and fill factor. 
• Strategy for search within a node : binary vs. linear search 
with or without prefetching. 
In the next section, we inves tigate how these three parameters 
impact the performance of CSB+-tree on Itanium 2. 
3. Performance of CSB+-Tree on Itanium 2 
Before we analyze the performance of the CSB+-tree on Itanium 
2, let us review our CSB+ -tree implementation and our 
experimentation framework. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
3.1 CSB+-Tree Implementation 
Because our goal is to incorporate our implementation of the 
CSB+-tree in MySQL, we had to modify the CSB+-tree 
implementation: 
• We placed key handling in separate functions so that we can 
reuse those from MySQL.  
• We use the default library version of malloc instead of 
implementing a memory manager that preallocates all 
needed index space as in the public domain implementation 
of the CSB+-tree
5. 
• Our implementation allows key size as well as node size to 
be initialized at run-time. Only the size of a record pointer is 
fixed to processor word size (4B on a 32 bit processor and 
8B on a 64 bit processor). 
We implemented the full CSB+-Tree variant because it trades 
space for improved response time. As a result, entire node groups 
are allocated when creating an index. A non-leaf group contains a 
bitmap and the non-leaf nodes. In addition to those, a leaf group 
contains a nodes-in-use counter (nCnt) and a pointer to the next 
(right) leaf group. The bitmap is used to speed up node splitting. 
It is used to locate the leftmost , empty node to the right of the 
split-node. We need to keep track of empty nodes because we 
implement lazy deletion (more on this below). The original 
CSB+-tree implementation does not contain any group-specific 
information, i.e., bitmaps and next-leaf-grp pointers are not 
present. 
A non-leaf node contains an entries-in-use counter (eCnt), a child 
group pointer and the entries (keys) while a leaf node contains an 
entries-in-use counter and the (key, pointer)  pairs. Our 
implementation of non-leaf nodes is  identical to the original 
CSB+-tree implementation. In c ontrast, our implementation of 
leaf nodes is simpler. Indeed, in the original CSB+-tree 
implementation, leaf nodes contain an entries-in-use counter, a 
dummy flag used to distinguish it from non leaf nodes, a next-
node pointer and a previous node pointer plus the (key, record)  
pairs. Clearly, the next/prev pointers are not needed and the 
article from Rao and Ross suggests that only the first and last 
node in a group have to contain a node pointer. Key size can be 
set at run-time when creating the index. Node size is a 
configuration parameter. 
The data structure used in our implementation is illustrated below. 
 
Figure 1. The CSB+-Tree data structure 
The CSB+¨-tree functions are implemented as follows: 
                                                                 
5 A public domain implementation of the original CSB+-tree from 
Rao and Ross can be obtained at 
www.cs.columbia.edu/~kar/software/csb+/ 
• Bulk load is recursive and all groups at each level are 
contiguously stored as in the original implementation. 
• Search is iterative. Both linear search and binary search are 
implemented. Without compile -time knowledge of node size 
and key size we cannot implement loop-unrolling of binary 
search. All key comparisons require a function call. In case 
of non-unique keys the leftmost match is returned. 
Group/node/entry iterators are updated in the bottom of the 
search loop. This enables us to prefetch the next-level node 
just before the loop iterates to that level and it the number of 
stall cycles is reduced. Prefetching nodes at the next-level 
before having identified the node to be visited is detrimental 
on Itanium 2. Prefetching can be turned on or off. 
• Range scan is using the search -function to get to the leaf 
level. The leaf level traversal is based on the nodes-in-use 
and entries-in-use counters. We prefetch two nodes ahead. 
• In contrast to the original implementation our insertion is 
iterative. Insertion is using the search function to get to the 
leaf level. The search-function stores information about the 
path from root to leaf making it possible for insertion to be 
iterative in case of splits. Due to lazy deletion some nodes in 
a node group might become empty. Instead of just moving 
nodes one position to the right in case of split we want to 
only move nodes until we reach an empty node. Using a 
bitmap in which each bit represents a node we can quickly 
clarify whether such an empty node exists. If a bitmap entry 
is non-zero, the corresponding node is empty. In such case 
we binary search the bitmap to identify the index of the 
empty node. The original impl ementation does not check for 
empty nodes and thus moves more nodes and get more group 
splits than necessary unless keys are rarely deleted. 
• Deletion relies on the search-function to get to the leaf level. 
The leftmost matching key is identified and the entry is 
deleted. As mentioned deletion is lazy, i.e. we never merge 
nodes. However the insertion algorithm ensures that empty 
nodes are reused. If a node is left empty the bitmap is 
updated. 
3.2 Experimental Set-up 
Hardware  
We run our experiments on a server equipped with a dual Itanium 
2 processor running Linux (see Table 1).  
Itanium 2 
Addressing 64 bits 
Clock frequency 900 MHz 
Number of processors 2 
RAM 4 GB 
L1 cache size/line 16 KB/64B 
L2 cache size/line 256 KB/128B 
L3 cache size/line 1,5 MB/128B 
OS Debian GNU/Linux 2.4.25 
Compiler Intel C/C++ 8.0.066 
Table 1. Hardware Set-Up 
The Itanium 2 processor is a 64-bit processor [10]. It is fully 
pipelined and can start executing a new instruction every clock 

--- PAGE 5 ---
cycle. This greatly improves the overall throughput if there are no 
dependencies among instructions. The “Explicitly Parallel 
Instruction Computing” (EPIC) makes it possible for the compiler 
to bundle instructions so that th e processor can execute them in 
parallel. It is important to note th at the compiler is responsible for 
bundling instructions – the processor does not rearrange 
instructions at runtime like e.g. the Pentium 4. 
The cache hierarchy is composed of three levels. The cache line 
size is 64B at cache level 1, and 128B at cache levels 2 and 3. 
Interestingly, Itanium 2 offers an API for explicitly prefetching 
data into cache. This can be done explicitely at the application 
level, or implicitly by the Intel compiler. 
System. Our implementation of CSB+-tr ee allows us to vary key 
size, number of keys per node (a s a direct combination of node 
size and key size as we have not implemented support for a 
tunable fill factor parameter) and search strategy (linear vs. binary 
with or without prefetching). N ode size is a multiple of the cache 
line size (On Itanium 2 we consider the L2/L3 cache line size – 
experiments showed that using a node size of 64B led to poor 
performance) while key size can be set freely. 
Workload.  The performance of the CSB+-tree actually concerns 
the performance of search (both tree traversal and scan) and the 
performance of insertions. Our workload thus focuses on these 
three operations through point queries (for tree traversal), table 
scan (for index scan), and insertions. We vary the number of 
records accessed or inserted for each experiment. 
Metric.  Our primary metric is res ponse time and its components 
in terms of busy and wait time. We rely on performance counters 
of the Itanium 2 to decompose response time. The model we use 
is detailed by Mortensen [11]. 
3.3 Point Query 
In our first set of experiments,  we focus on the impact of node 
size, number of keys per node and search strategy on the 
performance of point queries. 0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Lin
ear, 12
8B
Binary, 128BLinear
, 256B
Binary, 
256B
Linear
, 384B
Binary, 384B
Line
ar, 512B
Bina
ry, 51
2B
Search method and node size in bytes
Cycles
Busy Other stalls Dcache stalls
Figure 2. 200K searches after bulkloading 1M keys of 8B 
We start by comparing linear search and binary search as an 
internal node strategy. All papers  on CSB+-trees consider binary 
search as the internal node strategy [2][3][5]. On Itanium 2 
however, we thought that linear search might be an interesting 
alternative. We ran 200,000 point queries (access to a single key) 
with linear vs. binary search as internal node strategy and 
different node sizes. Fig. 2 shows the number of CPU cycles used 
by the different search methods and the decomposition of those 
cycles in busy, data cache stalls and other stalls. 
Interestingly, linear search requires fewer cycles than binary 
search when node size is lower th an 384B. With linear search, the 
amount of other stalls is significantly lower than with binary 
search. This is due to the high number of branch mispredictions 
when executing a binary search. Also, the busy period is longer 
with linear search and it increases  with node size, which is why 
binary search performs better when node size increases. 
Let us have a closer look at the impact of the number of keys per 
node on performance. We fix ke y size, vary node size and 
measure response time for linear search and binary search with or 
without prefetching. 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
128 256 384 512 768 1024
Node size in bytes
Time in seconds
Linear+PF Binary+PF Linear Binary
 
Figure 3. 200K searches after bulkloading 1M keys of 8B 
Fig. 3 shows the results we obtain for a key size of 8B Again, the 
performance of binary search im proves slightly when node size 
increases (as Hankins and Patel predicted) while the performance 
of linear search worsens. The performances of linear search and 
binary search are closer to each other when the number of keys 
per node diminishes (in our experi ment, when key size increases). 
As expected, prefetching improves the performances of linear and 
binary searches. The crossover between a node size where linear 
search is beneficial and a node  size where binary search is 
beneficial depends on key size. With 8B keys, the crossover point 
is a node size of 384B as shown in  fig. 3. With 16B keys, the 
crossover point is when node size is set to 512B. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
No-PF PF
Busy Other stalls Dcache stalls
 
Figure 4.  200K searches after bulkloading 1M keys of 8B. 
Node size is set to 128B. The search method is linear search. 
Let us zoom in on the impact of prefetching. We decompose 
response time into busy time, data cache stalls and other stalls for 
point queries with two different numbers of keys per node. Linear 
search is used as a search met hod. Fig. 4 shows the results we 

--- PAGE 6 ---
obtain with a node size of 128B and a key size of 8B (that is 14 
keys per non leaf node and 7 keys per leaf node due to the 
overhead). As expected, we observe that prefetching significantly 
reduces data cache misses. We observe that when node size 
increases, the benefit of prefetching increases. 
Let us get a more complete picture of the interaction between key 
size, node size and search method.  We ran an experiment where 
we measured response time for a range of key size, node size and 
search methods. We ran 200,000 point queries on an index 
populated with 100,000 keys. Fig. 5 traces the optimal node size 
for varying key sizes for linear and binary search with 
prefetching. Fig. 6 traces the response time when varying key size 
(node size is chosen as the optimal  shown from fig. 5). Fig. 6 is 
interesting because it gives us an  indication of how to set-up node 
size and search method depending on the key size given by the 
user. Surprisingly, linear search outperforms binary search for all 
key sizes (prefetching is turned on in both cases). We should also 
note that the optimal node size va ries with the number of keys 
loaded in the tree (graphs are not shown because of space 
limitation). 
0
256
512
768
1024
1280
1536
1792
8 16 32 48 112 240
Key Size in bytes
Node Size in bytes
linear + PF
binary + PF
Figure 5. Optimal node size, key size combinations for  linear 
and binary search with prefetching (100k Keys and 200K 
searches) 
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
0,2
0,25
0,3
0,35
0,4
8 16 32 48 112 240
Key Size in bytes
Time in Seconds
linear + PF
binary + PF
Figure 6. Response time for the optimal key size, node size 
combinations. (100k Keys and 200K searches) 
3.4 Scan 
In our second set of experiments,  we focus on the impact of node 
size, number of keys per node and search strategy on the 
performance of scan. 
Because of space limitation, we only show one of the graphs we 
obtained running our scan experiments. We focus on the impact 
of prefetching. Fig. 7 shows response time for combinations of 
key size and node size (the comb inations from fig. 5). We 
measure response time of a scan with or without prefetching. The 
performance of scan worsens when key  size increases. This is to 
be expected as the amount of byte s stored in the index increases. 
Interestingly, when prefetching is turned on performance 
improves significantly and remains stable as key size increases. 
The impact of node size is negligib le when prefetching is turned 
on. 
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
0,2
0,25
(128,8)
(384,16) (384,32) (512,48)
(1152,112)(1536,240)
(Node size, key size) in bytes
Time in seconds
Scan
Scan+PF
Figure 7. Response time for the optimal key size, node size 
combinations. 
3.5 Insertion 
In our third set of experiments,  we focus on the impact of node 
size, number of keys per node and search strategy on the 
performance of insertions. 
Let us focus on the impact of the number of keys per node (as a 
factor of node size and key size) on the performance of insertions. 
We ran an experiment inserting 2 million keys where we varied 
node size and key size. Fig. 8 shows the optimal combination of 
node size and key size. 
0,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
(128,8)
(256,16)(384,32)(512,48)
(768,112)
(1792,240)
(Node size, Key size) in bytes
Time in seconds
 
Figure 8. Response time for the optimal key size, node size 
combinations. (2M insertions) 
Again, this graph shows that node size should be adapted 
depending on the key size defined by the user at index creation 
time. Interestingly, the optimal  node sizes for insertions are 
different from the optimal node sizes we observed for point 
queries (see fig. 5). 
4. ADAPTATION METHOD 
The method we propose to adapt CSB+-tree to a given processor 
is simple and pragmatic. It is based on the observations we made 
on Itanium 2 and on the lessons learned from previous work [6,3]. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
We propose to adapt a CSB+-tree by setting node search strategy 
and node size at index creation time based on the key size given 
by the user. In order to do that, we need to construct a CSB+-tree 
configuration table that associates search strategy and node size to 
key sizes. This table can be constructed running the experiment, 
we denote as configuration experiment, where node size, key size 
(and search method) are varied to find the optimal node size, key 
size combinations (showed in Section 3). Fig. 9 shows the output 
of these experiments on Itanium 2. 
0
256
512
768
1024
1280
1536
1792
8 16 32 48 112 240
Key size in bytes
Node size in bytes
linear + PF
binary + PF
insertion
Figure 9. Optimal node size, key size combinations for  linear 
and binary search with prefetching (100k Keys and 200K 
searches)  and insertions (2M inserts). 
In the case of Itanium 2, linear search systematically outperforms 
binary search. As far as node size is concerned, we need to make 
a trade-off between search and insertion performances. We 
suggest that the optimal search a nd insertion node sizes be stored 
in the CSB+-tree configuration table. Whether performance is 
optimized for search or insertion could be a tunable parameter. 
We observed that optimal node si ze varies with the number of 
keys in the tree. We cannot use this dependency to dynamically 
set-up node size, but statistical information might be available 
when creating the index. As a consequence we have to make an 
assumption on tree size when running the configuration 
experiment. 
5. CONCLUSION 
We propose to adapt CSB+-tree to a given processor by setting 
node size and search strategy at index creation time based on the 
key size given by the users. This configuration table can be 
populated using the results of an experiment where node size, key 
size (and search method) are varied. 
The results we obtain on Itanium 2 are surprising. We expected 
linear search to perform correctly but we did not expect it to 
systematically outperform binary search. We also expected 
prefetching to have an impact on performance but we did not 
expect our simple prefetching scheme to perform as well as it did.  
Again, those results are only valid on Itanium 2. We are currently 
running the configuration experi ment on Pentium 3 and Pentium 
4. We are then planning to incorporate our adaptive CSB+-tree 
implementation in the heap storage manager of MySQL.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Björn þór Jónsson from Reykjavik 
Univeristy  for fruitful discussions. The Itanium 2 server we used 
for our experiments has been donated by HP in the context of the 
Gelato Federation.  
7. REFERENCES 
[1] J. Rao and K. Ross. Cache Conscious Indexing for Decision-
Support in Main Memory. In Proceedings of the 25th 
International Conference on Very Large Databases, 1999. 
[2] J. Rao and K. Ross. Making B+-Tree Cache Conscious in 
Main Memory. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD 
Conference, 2000. 
[3] S. Chen, P.Gibbons and T. Mowry. Improving Index 
Performance through Prefetching. In Proceedings of the 
ACM SIGMOD Conference, 2001. 
[4] T. Lehman and J.Carey. A Study of Index Structures for 
Main Memory Database Management Systems. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Very Large 
Databases, 1986. 
[5] A.Ailamaki, D.DeWitt, M.Hill and D.Wood. DBMSs on 
Modern Processor: Where Does Time Go? In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Very Large Databases, 
1999. 
[6]  R. A. Hankins and J. M. Pa tel. Effect of Node Size on the 
Performance of Cache Conscious B+-Trees. In Proceedings 
of the ACM SIGMETRICS Conference, 2003. 
[7] M. Samuel and A. Peders en. Speeding up Main Memory 
Table Scans in MySQL. DIKU Technical Report 05/03. 
2005. 
[8] M.Olsen and M.Kristensen. MySQL performance on Itanium 
2. DIKU Technical Report 04/15. 2004. 
[9] D.Comer. The Ubiquitous B-Tree. ACM Computing Surveys 
11(2), 1979. 
[10] “Intel® Itanium®2 Processor Reference Manual – For 
Software Devel-opment and Optimization”, Order Number: 
251110-002, Intel, USA, 2003 21.  
[11] Bjarke Mortensen. Beyond Response Time: Analyzing 
MySQL Performance. DIKU Technical Report 04-04-5. 
2005. 
 
 
 
