=== PAPER: P15-Graefe2001
=== FILENAME: B-tree Indexes and CPU Caches.pdf
=== PAGES: 10

--- PAGE 1 ---
B-tree Indexes and CPU Caches 
Goetz Graefe and Per-Ake Larson 
Microsoft 
{goetzg, palarson} @ microsoft. com 
Abstract 
Since many existing techniques for exploiting CPU 
caches in the implementation of B-tree indexes have not 
been discussed in the literature, most of them are surveyed 
here. Rather than providing a detailed performance 
evaluation for one or two of them on some specific con- 
temporary hardware, the purpose here is to survey and to 
make widely available this heretofore-folkloric knowledge 
in order to enable, structure, and hopefully stimulate fu- 
ture research. 
1. Introduction 
Today, most DBMS installations are “compute bound”, 
at least after sufficient disk drives and indexes have been 
added. However, the bottlenecks are actually not CPU 
cycles for instruction execution but cache faults and pipe- 
line stalls. At the present time, many product developers 
believe that the traditional goal of reducing instruction 
path length is much less important than techniques that 
improve cache faults and branch prediction. 
This brief paper is a summary of knowledge, much of it 
folkloric, about how to adapt database indexing software, 
in particular B-tree code, to memory hierarchies with mul- 
tiple levels of caches. Given the current trends in hardware 
design that require increasing sophistication from system 
software and compilers, for example Intel’s 64-bit proces- 
sors or Transmeta’s innovative processors that employ on- 
the-fly translation among different machine codes [ 181, 
this survey might be useful to both database researchers 
and implementers of commercial products. 
There are just a few principal sources of ideas behind 
these techniques. Unfortunately, they often conflict, and 
careful engineering tradeoffs are required, if possible sup- 
ported by rigorous research and measurements on the spe- 
cific target architecture if it is known. First, anything that 
reduces code complexity and code size is good since it 
reduces cache faults for instructions. In particular, reduc- 
ing the need for “if’, “case”, and “while” statements as 
well as virtual functions reduces erroneous predictions of 
conditional and computed branches. Second, anything 
helps that compresses or shortens B-tree entries, in leaves 
or in interior nodes. In fact, compaction of database struc- 
ture is a continuing goal, unaffected by the continually 
decreasing prices for disk space and memory, because the 
higher levels of the memory hierarchy continue to be small 
and expensive (on-chip and on-board caches) and because 
the bandwidth between all levels of the memory hierarchy 
seems eternally insufficient. Third, many of the techniques 
to deal with the delay (access and transfer time) between 
memory and disk can be re-applied to CPU caches. Fi- 
nally, since B-trees and (comparison-based) sorting are 
related in many interesting ways, many of the techniques 
that make sorting more cache-efficient can be re-applied to 
B-tree indexes. 
1.1 Scope of this Survey 
Most of this paper focuses on exact match index 
searches as typical in OLTP applications and in index 
nested loops joins. Inasmuch as materialized views satisfy 
their purpose, even decision support (DSS) and OLAP 
applications behave like read-only OLTP applications, i.e., 
lots of index searches rather than large sort and hash op- 
erations, but no issues with respect to concurrency control 
and recovery. Therefore, materialized views and their ef- 
fect on OLAP and DSS applications increase the impor- 
tance of very efficient implementation of B-tree indexes. 
Range queries typically are combinations of exact match 
searches for the lower or upper end of the range, combined 
with sequential scans. This also applies to searches 
required for existence checks or semi-joins. Considera- 
tions specific to insert, update, and delete operations as 
well as index creation or page compaction are mentioned 
where warranted. Concurrency control and other transac- 
tional issues are generally ignored here since they are 
largely orthogonal to the issue of cache efficiency. 
We only outline the key ideas for each technique, with- 
out attempting to list explicitly every thinkable variant and 
combination. In particular, we do not consider how to tune 
data structures and algorithms to multiple levels of caches 
and multiple sizes of cache lines, extended-data-out mem- 
ory and other burst transfer and read-ahead techniques, 
etc. Moreover, we do not consider in detail which tech- 
niques complement or inhibit each other, or how specifi- 
cally these techniques should be realized in data structures 
and code. Without doubt, there is plenty of room for future 
experimental research in this area. The purpose of this 
paper is to stimulate and to provide a starting point for 
such advanced research, not to preempt it. 
349 
1063-6382/01$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
In the remainder, let us presume one of the usual vari- 
ants of B-trees, e.g., B+-trees or B*-trees. They might be 
clustered or non-clustered indexes, single- or multi- 
column indexes, in virtual memory or on disk, etc. We 
also presume that pages are of a typical size, e.g., between 
4 KB and 64 KB, and that even the longest individual in- 
dex record fits on a page but that there are typically hun- 
dreds or even thousands of index records on each page. 
2. Related Work 
As mentioned above, this paper is a collection of 
known ideas rather than new research. For only a few of 
the ideas, we know of specific sources or related work. 
The classic paper by Bayer and McCreight [5] introduced 
B-trees. It also proposed the idea of delaying the splitting 
of a page until two neighboring pages are completely 
filled, in which case the two pages ,are split into three. This 
variant has become known as a B -tree. The original ver- 
sion of the B-tree stored complete records at all levels of 
the tree. The idea of storing all records at the leaf level and 
just keys in internal pages is described by Knuth [12] but 
the exact origin of the idea is not mentioned. This variant 
is of course known as a B+-tree. The idea of storing short 
separators instead of complete keys in internal pages is 
due to Bayer and Unterauer [6]. Strong, Markowsky and 
Chandra investigated different algorithms for searching 
within a page and concluded that, in most cases, binary 
search was preferably [ 171. For interpolation search, there 
are interesting theoretical results by Willard [19] but we 
only know of proprietary unpublished experimental work 
comparing binary search and interpolation search in a B- 
tree context. 
Antoshenkov, Lomet and Murray proposed an order- 
preserving compression method specifically for compress- 
ing keys in B-trees [3][4]. Order-preserving Huffman cod- 
ing is a simple modification of regular Huffman coding 
[ 121. Extracting (normalized) key prefixes to speed up 
comparisons and reduce cache misses, here referred to as 
“poor man’s normalized keys”, was introduced in the con- 
text of sorting [ 141. 
tiguously to reduce the amount of space needed for point- 
ers in index pages (or nodes for in-memory B-trees) [151. 
Boncz, Manegold, Kersten describe i3n in-memory data 
base system based on binary relations, i.e., each column in 
a table is stored as a simple array [8]. This reduces cache 
misses for queries that access only a few columns. 
Ailamaki, Dewitt and Hill proposed a similar scheme for 
storing records within each page of a heap file [2]. 
There is also a fair amount of work:, including a lot of 
proprietary unpublished work by soltware vendors, on 
restructuring programs and data structures to improve 
cache efficiency and thus the performance of their prod- 
ucts. For example, while moving function code inline (as 
in C++) or unrolling loops might help to reduce jump in- 
structions and stack adjustments, they often increase total 
code size and are therefore bad ideas with respect to CPU 
caches, in particular relatively small level- 1 instruction 
caches. Instead, rearranging basic blocks to improve the 
effectiveness of instruction pre-fetchling and of branch 
prediction hardware seem more important today. Simi- 
larly, rearranging fields in data structures or dimensions in 
multi-dimensional arrays can be verly effective, just as 
vertical partitioning can be in disk-blased database sys- 
tems. In fact, vertical partitioning of wide tables into mul- 
tiple indexes with small records, either in value order as in 
traditional non-clustered indexes or in record id order as 
sometimes called “columnar storage”, improves the den- 
sity of relevant information for some queries. 
3. A Brief Review of CPU Caches 
In modern computer systems, CPtJs are theoretically 
capable of completing several billion instructions per sec- 
ond, even in personal computers costing less than $1,000. 
However, the time to fetch an instruction or a data item 
from memory is relatively long. Idly waiting 60 nanosec- 
onds for a memory access wastes the opportunity for hun- 
dreds of instructions. In order to avoid such waiting or at 
least reduce its frequency, very fast memory called caches 
is designed to hold the most frequently used instructions 
and data items. This section provides a very brief introduc- 
tion to caches; readers interested in more details are re- 
by Loshin [ 131. 
Dewitty and Wood performed very care- ferred to the survey paper by Smith [I61 or a recent book ful measurements on a number of commercial database 
systems to determine exactly where the CPU time is spent 
when evaluating simple queries [I]. As expected, ;hey 
found the number of instructions actually executed per 
second to be much lower than the theoretical maximum. 
Delays caused by cache misses were one of the major fac- 
tors. 
If something is a good idea once, it usually is used 
again and again. So also with caches, and most modern 
computer systems employ a hierarchy of multiple caches. 
The level-1 cache is very small (typicallly 8 KB to 32 KB), 
very fast, very expensive, and very close to the CPU and 
its iegisters, Lsuaily on the CPU chip itself. The level-2 
cache is larger (typically 128 KB to MB), somewhat 
mounted on the same board. In some recent designs, even 
a third level of caching is used. Thus, instead of two levels 
in the memory hierarchy, namely CPU registers and main 
Chilimbi, Davidson, Hill and Larus studied cache con- 
ingly, found that careful layout of data can reduce cache 
misses significantly. The compared a number of in- 
memory tree structures and found B-trees to perform very 
well. Rao and Ross proposed storing adjacent pages con- 
sciOus data layout and placement i9i [lo] and, not suvris- slower, and located either on the CPU or at least 
350 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
memory as traditionally considered in algorithm design, 
there may be as many as five levels: registers, three levels 
of caches, and main memory. 
Because all cache management has to be implemented 
in hardware, it has to be simple. Caches are divided into 
fixed-length blocks called cache lines, typically 16 to 128 
bytes long. In addition, cache lines are organized into sets, 
typically four cache lines to a set. This organization is 
known as a 4-way set-associative cache. When a data item 
is brought into the cache, its memory address uniquely 
determines which set to use but not the cache line within 
the set. Within each set, the cache simulates LRU re- 
placement, typically using a second chance algorithm. To 
locate an item in the cache based on its address, the cache 
first selects the correct set using the appropriate bits of the 
address and then checks, in parallel, the addresses associ- 
ated with each cache line in the set. If the data item isn’t 
found there, a cache line must be fetched from the next 
level in the memory hierarchy and loaded into one of the 
cache lines in the set, as selected by the replacement algo- 
rithm. 
In general, caches affect only the speed of program 
execution, not the semantics. Updated cache lines are writ- 
ten back either immediately when updated (thus a “write- 
through cache”) or only when replaced (“write-back 
cache”). In addition, some modern cache designs include 
pre-fetch, invalidation, and write-behind instructions for 
specific memory addresses, very similar to the buffer pool 
hints used in many database systems. Some cache control- 
lers perform even automatic read-ahead and write-behind, 
again very similar to database systems and also file sys- 
tems. Note that a major part of the cost of a context switch 
is caused by a flurry of cache faults needed to reload the 
appropriate code and data into the cache hierarchy. This 
effect may be visible many thousand instructions after the 
context switch. Thus, reducing the need for context 
switches, e.g., by timely requests for disk read-ahead, im- 
proves cache effectiveness. 
Modern processors typically divide the execution of an 
instruction into several steps and may have many instruc- 
tions “in flight” at the same time. An instruction, for ex- 
ample an addition, fires when its operands and an arithme- 
tic unit become available. The cache may have multiple 
memory access requests outstanding at any given time, 
much in the same way that the file system may queue up 
multiple requests to a disk controller. Together, these fea- 
tures make it possible to hide some of the memory access 
latency. However, they also make it difficult to predict the 
exact penalty caused by a cache miss because it depends 
on the context, i.e., the surrounding instructions and the 
contents of the cache. Nonetheless, average cache miss 
penalties are very significant; typical delays are 5 to 10 
cycles for level-] cache fault that is satisfied by the level-2 
cache, and 50 to 150 cycles for a level-2 fault that needs to 
access the main memory. 
On a shared-memory machine with multiple processors, 
each one with its own level-I and level-2 caches, copies of 
the same data item may be stored in multiple caches. If 
one of the processors modifies the data item, all other 
caches storing the item must somehow be informed that 
their copies are no longer valid. Furthermore, the value in 
memory is no longer valid either. If some processor at- 
tempts to read the value from memory, the correct value 
has to be obtained from the appropriate cache. Usually, the 
value in memory is updated at the same time. Maintaining 
cache coherency is essential, of course, but the overhead is 
significant. It is particularly noticeably for heavily used, 
fast-changing data items such as locks (latches) protecting 
common data structures. A hash table is frequently used to 
keep track of the contents of the buffer pool. The hash 
table may be accessed and modified by multiple threads 
concurrently and therefore has to be protected by at least 
one lock. Every access to the hash table modifies the lock 
twice: from unlocked to locked on entry and vice versa on 
exit. In a multiprocessor system with many processors, 
this causes the currently valid value of the lock to ping- 
pong from cache to cache. When a processor attempts to 
read the lock, it is unlikely to find the correct value in its 
cache and has to read it from memory, that is, in reality 
from whatever cache contains the currently valid value. 
Note that this delay occurs even if there is no contention 
on the lock. The delay adds significantly to the cost of 
acquiring locks, making it important to keep the frequency 
of lock acquisitions low. 
4. Adapting disk-based techniques 
A pretty obvious idea starts with the observation that 
the size of today’s large caches (e.g., 2 MB) is comparable 
to main memory sizes of 10 to 15 years ago. Therefore, the 
techniques that helped then to bridge the gap between 
memory and disk might help today to bridge the gap be- 
tween cache and main memory. 
4.1 Alignment with cache lines 
The most obvious idea is to align records and their 
fields with cache lines. For example, if an index entry is 
smaller than a cache line, it should be fully contained 
within a single cache line, just as records smaller than 
pages are typically stored entirely within a single page. 
Just as “spanning records” can dramatically increase disk 
YO, containing each index entry in a single cache line can 
substantially reduce the number of cache faults. 
In addition to data records, the page header and its 
fields need to be considered. Thus, if some fields in the 
page header are used more often than others, and in par- 
ticular if these fields are often used together, those fields 
should share a cache line. Since most page headers are 
larger than a single cache line, and since most read-only 
351 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
accesses to pages inspect only a few fields in the page 
header, careful design of the page header may reduce the 
number of cache faults by one or two for each access to a 
page. 
4.2 Pre-fetching and asynchrony 
Another technique that might be adapted from disk- 
based B-tree indexes is pre-fetching. Note that recent CPU 
architectures, e.g., Intel’s Pentium 111, support asynchro- 
nous pre-fetch instructions for multiple cache levels. If the 
page header spans multiple cache lines, the buffer manager 
might issue pre-fetch instructions for all of them before 
any real work on the page begins. Similarly, while inspect- 
ing the page header, one might want to pre-fetch parts of 
the indirection vector (the set of byte offsets that enable 
variable-length records, to be discussed later). If binary 
search is to be used, one might pre-fetch the middle (me- 
dian or %-way point). One could even pre-fetch the quar- 
tiles (% and %-way points), performing twice as many 
cache fetches as are immediately required, but doing so 
asynchronously. Similarly, one can pre-fetch the two pos- 
sible next points before each comparison throughout the 
binary search. 
Once the target record has been located, it may be 
beneficial to issue prefetch instructions for fields needed 
in subsequent processing, i.e., output fields and fields ref- 
erenced in any selection predicates applied immediately. 
This is feasible, of course, only for fields stored at a fixed 
offset in the record. In a scan or range search, every record 
of a page has to be inspected. In that case, it may be 
worthwhile prefetching fields from multiple records. 
The complement to pre-fetching, write-behind after an 
update, is already implemented in many CPU caches, but 
typically is not under software control. 
4.3 B-trees of cache lines 
For large disk pages and small index records, another 
obvious idea for improving cache locality is to re-apply 
the entire concept of B-trees within a single large disk 
page. A single disk page (e.g., 16 KB) serves the role of 
the entire disk (or an extent of contiguous pages on disk) 
in a traditional on-disk B-tree, and a cache line (e.g., 128 
B) serves the role of a disk page. Insertions are applied to 
cache lines, and if such an insertion fails, a cache lines is 
split and left half-full - exactly like traditional on-disk B- 
tree pages. In-memory B-trees with nodes equal to cache 
lines can be multiple times faster than in-memory binary 
trees [IO]. 
The same basic idea, transferring techniques first in- 
vented for disks to modern large caches, has been ex- 
ploited in sorting. Several of the successful techniques for 
cache-conscious sorting are thoughtful adaptations of ex- 
ternal sorting techniques to caches and large main memo- 
ries, e.g., AlphaSort [ 141. A typical example is generating 
runs as large as the cache and then merging multiple such 
in-memory runs into a single on-disk run. 
5. Packing more information into cache lines 
Since cache lines (like disk pages) are typically of fixed 
size and cannot be made larger, an obvious avenue to re- 
duce cache faults (and buffer faults) is to increase the 
amount of information captured in a single cache line (and 
disk page) by compressing and encoding data. Interest- 
ingly, some of the encoding and coimpression techniques 
complement and enable each other very nicely. By simpli- 
fying key and record structures, encoding techniques can 
improve cache performance in two ways. First, less code is 
required during index search, improving the effectiveness 
of caching machine code. Second, the implementation of 
compression is simplified, which otherwise can be a truly 
daunting task if field types, sizes, collation sequences, etc. 
all have to be considered in the compression scheme itself. 
5.1 Order-preserving compression 
The more data, the more cache faults; therefore, com- 
pression is an obvious candidate technique for reducing 
cache faults in indexes. When records become shorter, 
page fan-outs become larger, the entire B-tree becomes 
less deep, and more of the B-tree can be kept resident in 
the U0 buffer and even in the CPU cache. The amount of 
savings depends, of course, on the compression ratio as 
well as on the contention for buffer or cache space. Note 
also that the lookups required in dictionary-based com- 
pression schemes may actually increase cache misses. 
There are a number of compression schemes of various 
sophistication; often the simplest ones work best in prac- 
tice or at least quite well. Optimal Huffman codes are built 
by successively merging two sets of symbols, starting with 
each symbol being a singleton set and ending when only 
one set is left. The two sets to be merged at each step are 
the ones with the lowest frequency. A small variation of 
this algorithm considers merging only neighboring sets 
[ 121, and results in an order-preserving Huffman code that 
is typically almost as effective as optimal Huffman coding. 
Alternatively, order-preserving dictionary compression 
can be used. Using a fixed dictionary of partial string val- 
ues, the ALM scheme [3] employs a carefully chosen fi- 
nite set of strings to divide the entire set of possible strings 
into ranges. The set must include all possible single- 
character strings, but any number of (additional strings may 
be chosen and may be of any length. Each range is as- 
signed a rank number in the desired sort order. During 
compression, these numbers serve as encoding for seg- 
ments of the uncompressed string that match (the prefix 
of) a string in the set of strings chosen for encoding. 
While compressing keys seems like a very good idea, 
there might be an easier way to fit more entries into a leaf 
node and an interior B-tree node: simply don’t store the 
352 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
entire key. If the following techniques are applied aggres- 
sively, it is not clear that the remaining entries are long 
enough to make compression worthwhile. 
5.2 Key normalization 
A different approach to record simplification is to nor- 
malize all keys to binary strings, such that the entire key 
comparison is reduced to a simple comparison of strings in 
binary sort order. The salient point in key normalization is 
that the encoding is entirely order-preserving, i.e., a com- 
parison of two such strings in binary sort order is suffi- 
cient to determine the relative sort order of the two origi- 
nal keys in the desired, possibly complex sort order. By 
normalizing keys when they are inserted into the index, a 
substantial amount of (fairly complex) functionality is 
moved from B-tree search to B-tree insertion and update. 
One might consider this technique a form of early binding 
familiar from compiler optimizations. It affects directly 
the instruction cache more than the data cache, and it en- 
ables or simplifies other techniques that affect the data 
cache, for example compression discussed above or trun- 
cation discussed later. 
Column boundaries, types, and lengths as well as colla- 
tion sequences (e.g., case-insensitive German with Umlaut 
characters etc., early or late sort position of Null values) 
and sort orders (ascending or descending) are all encoded 
in a single binary string. The encoding procedure is 
somewhat complex for some collating sequences, but no 
more so than an actual comparison without key normaliza- 
tion. The principal technique is to translate single charac- 
ters and character groups into rankings. For some collating 
sequences, multiple passes over the original string are re- 
quired, assigning additional rankings in each pass. 
In a non-clustered index, this binary string may include 
not only the search key but also the bookmark, i.e., the 
pointer to the full record, which is typically a record ad- 
dress (record id, RID) or a search key in a clustered index. 
Bookmarks must be included in search keys if search keys 
are not otherwise unique, because the bookmarks permit 
searching for and deleting the correct index entries when 
an indexed column is updated. 
While key normalization is very effective, it introduces 
some potential problems. First, it is not always simple or 
even possible to recover each original column value from 
a normalized binary string. Second, the index entries may 
vary in length after normalization, even if the clear text 
values are all of uniform length. Third, normalized keys 
might be substantially longer than a compact representa- 
tion of the individual clear text column values. 
The first issue only applies for a B-tree’s leaf level; in 
the upper levels, only separators are needed, not actual 
values. In the leaf level, it might be required to store both 
the normalized key and the clear text value of non- 
recoverable columns. If only the normalized key is stored, 
it is probably useful to pad columns to byte or word 
boundaries, and to keep an indirection vector for the col- 
umns in each record. The second issue is real but is miti- 
gated by the fact that there is only one length indicator 
required per index entry, not one per field per entry as for 
multiple individual variable-length columns. The third 
issue is the most important one among those three and 
must be dealt with. 
5.3 Prefix and suffix truncation 
In the lower levels of a B-tree, neighboring keys are 
similar - that’s why they are neighbors. In particular, they 
are similar or even equal in their first few bytes. They 
might even be similar in a fair number of leading bytes, or 
even in all bytes in the case of duplicate search keys. In 
those cases, it makes sense to store those equal bytes only 
once, e.g., for an entire B-tree node, and then to remove 
those leading bytes (the common prefix) from all individ- 
ual entries [6]. Of course, the length of the common prefix 
cannot be predicted in general, and therefore the prefix 
cannot be stored in a fixed-length field in the page header. 
Thus, one of the page’s records has to be dedicated to the 
prefix. Alternatively, the shared common prefix might be 
derived from the boundary values in the parent node 
within the B-tree, and might even be stored only there. 
This requires that all retrievals, including scans, access the 
index to reconstruct the missing prefix of the keys on a 
page. 
Prefixes may be common within an entire B-tree node 
or only parts of it. It is a tradeoff between effectiveness 
and code complexity. If sub-pages of fixed size are de- 
fined, and if prefixes are identified and truncated within 
each sub-page, the page organization starts to resemble the 
“B-tree within a page” design discussed earlier. On the 
other hand, one can divide the entries in a B-tree node by 
their shared prefixes and thus apply to binary strings a 
variant of order-preserving dictionary compression. 
In all but the leaf levels of a B-tree, only separator val- 
ues are needed. Storing more than that, e.g., full keys, is a 
waste of storage space. Thus, trailing bytes (the redundant 
suffix) that do not help separate neighboring entries can be 
truncated, saving storage space, (potentially) comparison 
effort, and cache faults. For some complex international 
collation sequences, determining a minimal separator may 
not be trivial. For simple keys, on the other hand, it might 
even be possible to create short artificial separator keys, 
rather than propagating an actual key from the node being 
split. 
In order to increase the effectiveness of prefix and suf- 
fix truncation, it might be useful to split nodes not pre- 
cisely in the middle but by the shortest possible separator 
near the middle, as originally proposed in [61. Most B-tree 
algorithms work just fine even if some nodes are less than 
353 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
half full. This idea can be applied both during random in- 
sertions (e.g., split at the 50% point & 15%) and during 
bottom-up B-tree creation from a sorted stream (e.g., for 
desired fill factor 90%, split at 90% k 10%). 
5.4 Next-neighbor differencing 
In an alternative to prefix truncation that achieves sub- 
stantially better compression, each entry stores only the 
difference to its immediate neighbor or predecessor. For 
example, if a single-column index has relatively few dis- 
tinct values and therefore relatively many duplicates (a 
typical candidate for a bitmap index), there are two stan- 
dard storage formats. These two storage formats either 
employ separate entries (easy insertion and deletion with- 
out logic for special cases, but redundant values occupying 
disk page and CPU cache) or store a single copy of the 
duplicate key value with a list of records or record pointers 
(space efficient, but complex record and list management). 
“Next-neighbor differencing” combines the advantages of 
the two standard storage formats. Such difference encod- 
ing might be extended very effectively beyond the search 
key into the bookmark. Next-neighbor differencing is also 
very effective if the first column in a multi-column index 
has relatively few distinct key values. 
In addition to the space savings and the resulting reduc- 
tion in CPU cache faults, next-neighbor differencing read- 
ily permits faster comparisons by identifying and avoiding 
redundant work. If the first n symbols match between the 
search key and a B-tree record, and if this B-tree record 
matches with its succeeding neighbor in the first m sym- 
bols, then this neighbor matches with the search key in the 
first min (m, n) symbols, and these symbols do not need to 
be compared with the search key. These “symbols” can be 
characters, columns, etc. 
Insertion and deletion of an individual record is fairly 
straightforward. Only the immediate successor of the 
newly inserted or deleted record may need to be modified. 
The immediate predecessor record only needs to be in- 
spected. Bulk insertion, e.g., while building a B-tree index 
after sorting the candidate B-tree records, is also very fast, 
and can even benefit from next-neighbor differencing ex- 
ploited in the sort operation’s comparisons. 
Unfortunately, next-neighbor differencing impedes bi- 
nary search, and therefore it is typically only employed in 
leaf pages (which typically hold larger and therefore fewer 
entries, and in which sequential scans might be accept- 
able). The key impediment to combining next-neighbor 
differencing and binary search (and interpolation search, 
discussed below) is potentially lengthy backtracking re- 
quired to assemble a full index entry. 
There are some potential remedies to expensive linear 
traversals. First, by choosing larger symbols, e.g., entire 
ID 
columns or at least blocks of characters, prefix sharing is 
reduced, but at the expense of reduced compression. 
Second, “anchor records” can be interspersed at 
roughly equal intervals throughout the: page, meaning that 
some records are stored in full without next-neighbor dif- 
ferencing even if they share a prefix with their predeces- 
sors. Any linear traversal is limited by the distance to the 
first anchor record. In a more sophisticated design, anchor 
records might be created and maintainled opportunistically, 
e.g., only if there is free space in the disk page that would 
otherwise go unused. 
Third, in an adaptation of the faster comparisons dis- 
cussed above, reassembly of a complete record and back- 
tracking through the page can stop when a record is 
reached that has already been compaxed with the search 
key. In other words, backtracking cant stop when the cur- 
rent lower bound of the remaining search interval is 
reached. In addition, it can stop when a record is reached 
that shares a prefix with the current upper bound. 
A fourth method that complements the other three em- 
ploys back pointers within a page. During insertion, after a 
record is compared to its immediate predecessor and the 
shared prefix is truncated, the record is augmented with a 
pointer to the first record (on the cui-rent page) with the 
same prefix. Thus, no backward scan among the preceding 
records is needed; the back pointer guarantees that each 
additional record access (and potential cache fault) results 
in an additional part of the prefix. In order to reassemble a 
full record that shares n symbols with its predecessor, at 
most n prior records must be accessed. 
Table 1 : Illustration of next-neighibor differencing. 
Record key 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Hardware 
Hardware\SCSI disk 
Software 
Sof tware\M us ic Plave r 
Software\Office 
Software\W indows 
Software\W indows\Explorer 
Prefix 
length 
0 
8 
0 
9 
9 
16 
a 
Skip 
count 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
1 
Table 1 illustrates the effect of next-neighbor differenc- 
ing. Only the underlined part of each record key is actually 
stored. It is immediately obvious that this form of com- 
pression is quite effective, whereas page-wide prefix trun- 
cation would have no effect at all. Now consider re- 
assembly of the actual key of record ~4. As it stands, two 
additional records must be accessed, records 3 and 2. At 
the expense of some loss in compression, it might be bene- 
ficial to skip over preceding records that contribute only 
one or a small number of characters. In that case, record 4 
354 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
would store the key “\Office”, the prefix length would be 
8, and the skip count would be 2. A similar change would 
apply to record 5. By reducing the number of steps re- 
quired to re-assemble a full record, this design may reduce 
cache faults during re-assembly of actual keys. 
Back pointers do not hinder comparison efficiency in a 
linear scan over a page, yet help in a binary search because 
the linear traversal is replaced by the minimal number of 
jumps immediately to relevant preceding records. Insertion 
and deletion are a bit more expensive though because of 
the need to update back pointers. 
6. Redesigning data structures and search 
algorithms 
While most of the techniques discussed so far improve 
overall B-tree performance, e.g., reducing the number of 
instructions required or reducing the number of disk pages 
as well as the number of cache lines that need to be ac- 
cessed, there are some techniques that very specifically 
target cache faults, particularly in the data cache (as op- 
posed to the instruction cache due to code simplification). 
6.1 Poor man’s normalized keys 
If B-tree entries can be of different lengths - be that be- 
cause the clear text values genuinely are of different 
lengths or because key normalization and compression or 
truncations have been employed - most B-tree implemen- 
tations use indirection vectors containing byte offsets and, 
in many implementations, record lengths. A third candi- 
date field in these indirection records is a prefix of the 
normalized key. If,. for example, each indirection record 
contains the first 2, 4, 6, or even 8 bytes of the key, many 
searches never have to inspect the remaining bytes in the 
B-tree entries, and therefore do not incur cache faults for 
these bytes. We call this fixed-size prefix a poor man’s 
normalized key. This technique works well only if com- 
mon key prefixes are truncated before the poor man’s 
normalized keys are extracted. In that case, a small poor 
man’s normalized key (e.g., 2 bytes) may be sufficient to 
avoid most cache faults on the full records; if prefix trun- 
cation is not used, even a fairly large poor man’s normal- 
ized key may not be very effective, in particular in B-tree 
leaves. 
Just as reducing a complex multi-column multi-type 
comparison function to a comparison of binary strings 
greatly reduces code complexity and path length, compil- 
ing a fixed-length fixed-type comparison of 2 or 4 bytes 
into the B-tree search greatly reduces path length, because 
this comparison can be executed in a single hardware in- 
struction. In order to fit as many indirection records as 
possible into each cache line, it might make sense to keep 
only record offsets and poor man’s normalized keys in the 
indirection vector, and to keep record lengths in the main 
records. 
Page header 
Bvte offset 
normalized key 
Indirection 
vector 
Space for future 
records and 
indirection entries 
Record 2 
Gnn 
1- 
Pointer 
(byte offset) 
Record length 
Normalized key 
El- ..-.._- 1 Bookmark 1 
--.. 
Figure 1 : Page and record structure 
Figure 1 shows a page with the details of its internal 
structures carefully designed. The typical components are 
a page header, an indirection vector, and a few records of 
different lengths. The records here represent, of course, 
entries in a B-tree leaf or separators in an interior node of 
a B-tree. The gap is the result of a prior deletion or size 
reduction. The slots in the indirection vector include byte 
offset and a poor man’s normalized key, each typically 
two bytes large. Indirection vector and record space grow 
towards each other until the space is full, accommodating 
both small and large records without wasted space. It is 
possible to separate the poor man’s normalized keys from 
the byte offsets into two separate arrays in order to pack 
keys even more densely into cache lines. However, while 
the page layout in Figure 1 contains only two elements 
that can conveniently grow towards each other until the 
page is full, separating poor man’s normalized keys and 
byte offsets forces three elements and thus increases the 
complexity of free space management within the page. 
The records start with a length indicator, also typically two 
bytes, and continue with the remainder of the key and ei- 
ther a bookmark (in a leaf page of a non-clustered index) 
or a page number (in an interior B-tree node). Note that 
the indirection vector is close to the page header, in order 
to increase the chance of sharing cache lines. 
Note that poor man’s normalized keys can be exploited 
whether or not key normalization is applied to the entire 
key. In both cases, order-preserving compression, e.g., 
order-preserving Huffman codes, can be employed to in- 
crease the amount of information captured in the poor 
man’s normalized key and therefore the value of each in- 
expensive comparison of poor man’s normalized keys. 
Poor man’s normalized keys are very effective not only for 
355 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
indexes but also for comparison-based sorting and were 
exploited in Alphasort [ 141. 
In some cases, the first few bytes might cover the entire 
search key. For example, a database index on a unique 
four-byte non-null column can rely entirely on the poor 
man’s normalized key, with no additional bytes for each 
B-tree key required in the full record. Since this case ap- 
pears to be not unusual, e.g., in indexes on single-column 
primary keys or if a B-tree structure is used to implement 
an index on hash values, some amount of special-case 
code might be worthwhile 
6.2 Interpolation search 
Even if comparisons inspect only the indirection vector 
and its poor man’s normalized keys, it is even better to 
avoid comparisons altogether. In sort implementations, 
this goal has led to renewed interest in radix and distribu- 
tion sorts. For searching, interpolation search can be ex- 
ploited, in which the next position to be probed (within the 
array of remaining candidates) is not simply the center but 
calculated based on the search value and the values at the 
low and high end among the remaining candidates. Inter- 
polation works for numeric keys as well as poor man’s 
normalized keys interpreted as integer numbers. 
For a uniform distribution and a large disk page, this 
technique may reduce the number of required comparisons 
(and therefore cache faults) by a factor of three or even 
five. For example, if a disk page of 64 KB contains re- 
cords of 16 bytes, a binary search requires about 12 com- 
parisons, whereas interpolation search might require only 
3 to 5 comparisons, and those typically close together, 
possibly on the same cache line. Thus, interpolation search 
very specifically reduces cache faults and thus improves 
the cache behavior of B-tree index code. A further reduc- 
tion in cache accesses can be achieved if the lowest and 
highest values within a page are not fetched from the page 
itself but “remembered” from the separator keys in the 
parent page. 
Since hash values are usually fairly uniformly distrib- 
uted, B-trees on hash values used as a substitute for tradi- 
tional hash indexes benefit greatly from interpolation 
search, in particular when it is combined with poor man’s 
normalized keys. Another technique to achieve more uni- 
form key distributions is to employ order-preserving com- 
pression, e.g., order-preserving Huffman codes, as these 
codes are designed to give maximal entropy (and thus .uni- 
form distributions) to each bit. In order to guard against 
the worst case, i.e., linear search, simple tests for uniform- 
ity might be based on summary data that can be main- 
tained inexpensively in each page, e.g., the sum and possi- 
bly the sum of squares of search keys in the page, or at 
least of poor man’s normalized keys - in effect, one com- 
putes the correlation between the actual distribution and an 
ideal linear distribution. If the actual distribution is found 
to be very different from uniform, interpolation search is 
not even attempted, and instead only traditional binary 
search is used. Alternatively, only the first few steps could 
use interpolation, followed by binary search if additional 
steps are required. There might be benefits to biasing some 
interpolated probes towards the center or using non-linear 
interpolation at least in the first step. Finally, for a unique 
index, the range of keys represented in a leaf (captured by 
the separation keys in the parent level) can be compared 
with the number of keys in the leaf page - if the range and 
the count are almost equal, a linear distribution may be 
presumed and interpolation search can be used with great 
confidence. 
6.3 Pointing to page extents 
If multiple neighboring pointers point to pages that ac- 
tually are neighbors on disk, which is quite likely if the B- 
tree index has been optimized for multi-page range que- 
ries, it is possible to represent multiple pointers simply by 
the first page number and a count [15]. This idea is, of 
course, reminiscent of the difference between dense and 
sparse indexes, although there the idea of pointing to a 
group of items there applies to records, not to pages. A 
number of B-tree implementations allocate space in con- 
tiguous extents, e.g., IBM’s VSAM and indexes in Sybase 
and Microsoft SQL Server. Obviously, the allocation algo- 
rithm can be tuned to allocate neighboring disk pages for 
neighboring B-tree nodes, which probably also improves 
the performance of key-order scans, including the effec- 
tiveness of track caching in disk drives and disk control- 
lers. 
Similarly, rather than storing absolute page numbers, 
one might store the difference frorn the previous page 
number. If the representation of the difference can be 
compressed, the shortest representation (which ideally 
requires 0 bits) should be reserved for a difference of one, 
i.e., neighboring pointers refer to neighboring pages. 
While the compression potential seeims interesting, deter- 
mining the absolute value of a page pointer might cost 
multiple cache faults; this issue seems very similar to the 
issues in next-neighbor differencing., and anchor records 
might be useful here as well. 
6.4 Separating keys and pointers, and vertical 
partitioning 
It is well known that multi-dimensional arrays can be 
stored row-major or column-major., and that relational 
tables can be stored row-by-row or column-by-column. 
Similarly, the keys and pointers in an interior B-tree node 
can be stored either as a collection of records, each con- 
taining a key and a pointer, or as two parallel arrays, one 
an array of keys and the other an array of pointers. Given 
that a typical B-tree search inspects in each node many 
keys yet needs only a single pointer, moving all the keys 
together and therefore fitting more of them on a cache line 
356 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
seems like a promising idea. In a binary search or an inter- 
polation search, where most of the early comparisons will 
result in at least one cache fault within the indirection vec- 
tor, this separation may reduce the number of cache fault 
by 1 or 2 because more of the final comparisons reference 
the same cache line. 
This idea works well if both keys and bookmarks are of 
fixed length, because address calculations are simple. 
However, if search keys are of varying lengths and if 
bookmarks (the pointers in non-clustered indexes) are of 
varying lengths (for example because they are search keys 
in a clustered index), the overhead to manage and navigate 
among all these variable-length entities might not warrant 
the added complexity. It might be more effective to focus 
on prefix truncation and poor man’s normalized keys that 
suffice for most comparisons in the search. 
Nonetheless, taking the idea of separating keys and 
pointers even further, individual columns in a multi- 
column index can be assigned to separate sections within a 
disk page. Some experiments seem to indicate advantages 
of doing so, at least for heap pages and some access pat- 
terns [2]. If there are multiple variable-length columns, 
additional indirection vectors are needed, and the indirec- 
tion vectors can be considered (fixed-length) columns in 
their own right. Moreover, these single-column indirection 
vectors could cache poor man’s normalized keys, increas- 
ing the number of columns but possibly improving search 
performance. 
The largest potential drawback to vertical partitioning 
within a page is free space management for variable- 
length fields. Allocating only a single section for all vari- 
able-length fields might alleviate this problem although it 
will not completely solve it. Given that variable-length 
fields are often longer than a cache line, this simplification 
probably doesn’t deteriorate cache performance. The ar- 
rangements of the fixed-length fields, including pointers to 
the variable-length values and poor man’s normalized keys 
for individual fields, is now quite straightforward if an 
initial estimate for the total number of records in the page 
is used. If the initial estimate turns out to be wrong, the 
entire page must be rearranged, which is simple but might 
be expensive. Further research into vertical partitioning of 
B-tree leaves and interior nodes seems warranted, in par- 
ticular if it includes the effects of key normalization, pre- 
fix and suffix truncation, and differential encoding of page 
numbers. 
7. CPU scheduling 
All the techniques described so far have focused on 
spatial locality, i.e., organizing information within mem- 
ory. An additional technique, largely unexplored, is tem- 
poral locality. Consider a typical database server that runs 
in multiple threads, each typically executing on behalf of 
different clients or connections. In the course of serving a 
client interaction, each of these threads typically go 
through a number of fairly standard activities, e.g., search- 
ing for compiled execution plans, verifying schema ver- 
sions (or some other mechanism to force recompilation 
after schema changes), verifying access rights, looking up 
data in tables and their indexes, appending records to the 
recovery log, etc. Each of these activities uses a substantial 
amount of code as well as server-wide data structures, 
often substantially exceeding the size of the fast but small 
cache memory. Rather than letting each thread fault this 
code and these data structures into the cache and then 
force them out of the cache when faulting in other code, 
would it make sense to dedicate brief periods of CPU time 
to each such activity? 
For example, presume that, in addition to tens of 
threads performing read-only work, there are tens of server 
threads performing updates and thus needing to append 
records to the recovery log. In order to avoid writing half- 
full log pages, database servers routinely employ group 
commit, i.e., some of the threads attempting to force 
commit records to stable storage are briefly held back in 
the hope that other threads will fill the log page. The same 
idea could be applied to the logging code and the in- 
memory data structures used to administer the log: all 
threads attempting to write to the log are very briefly held 
back until the log writing activity is due again, and then all 
such threads can benefit from the cache faults that only 
one of them incurred. Thus, the overall server process is 
organized into task-oriented “micro servers” rather than 
connection-oriented threads. Note that micro servers might 
be allocated to specific CPUs in a multi-processor system. 
In effect, this design is one more variation to traditional 
CPU time slicing and multiplexing. If ongoing work for 
client connections is represented purely in data structures 
and not in threads and their call stacks, it is quite straight- 
forward to implement using queues of pending work re- 
quests and a simple non-preemptive scheduler that keeps 
track of non-empty queues. Hardly any additional work is 
created (other than administering queues) and no work is 
saved (as measured in instruction counts), but substantial 
time might be saved due to reduced cache faults. Thus, 
overall server throughput might improve substantially, 
although response times might deteriorate. 
In addition to cache faults on server-wide data struc- 
tures, the micro server execution architecture might well 
reduce cache faults in the level-I instruction cache, given 
that contemporary full-featured database server processes 
exceed five million bytes of binary code (about one mil- 
lion lines of source code). Moreover, some modern archi- 
tectures, in particular Transmeta’s new processors [ 181, 
employ a limited cache of “morphed code”, i.e., code 
translated from one binary format (e.g., Intel x86) to actual 
hardware code. Today’s processors have a cache of only 
128 KB, with future increases to 256 KB announced. For 
357 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
large executable files, this cache will experience faults 
similar to a large instruction cache, which a micro server 
architecture might reduce substantially. 
8. Summary and conclusions 
CPU caches and search indexes each are essential for 
computer performance. Programmers of high-performance 
platform software have to consider them when designing 
data structures and implementing code. This brief survey 
of known techniques is an attempt to capture many of the 
software techniques that are promising or even already 
proven in practice. We hope that this survey serves to 
stimulate and organize future experimental research into 
the interactions between B-tree indexes and CPU caches, 
and possibly also database query execution techniques 
beyond index search. 
In conclusion, we list some of the issues that seem par- 
ticularly promising for careful experimental research: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
The effectiveness of the listed technique and their 
many promising combinations 
The effects of column-wise storage within a B-tree 
page, and possible special treatments of the first col- 
umn in a multi-column B-tree index. 
The effectiveness of poor man’s normalized keys (and 
other techniques) in B-tree pages compared to their 
effects in sorting. 
Algorithmic details and an analysis of next-neighbor 
differencing augmented with pointers for binary 
search and interpolation search. 
Software control over pre-fetching on modern proces- 
sors using explicit pre-fetch instructions. 
Investigating the idea of using micro-servers to im- 
prove temporal locality. 
Techniques to increase actual instruction-level paral- 
lelism. 
Techniques to reduce pipeline stalls due to conditional 
and computed branches. 
Acknowledgements 
Many people have shared ideas about caches with us 
over the years, and we have to admit that we lost track of 
who said what first. Our colleagues in the Microsoft SQL 
Server product group have been a great source of chal- 
lenge and inspiration. David Lomet suggested adding or- 
der-preserving dictionary compression to the “bag of 
tricks” described here. Rick Snodgrass suggested numer- 
ous improvements to an earlier draft of this paper. Jim 
Gray pointed out a few issues and ideas that we had over- 
looked. 
10. References 
Anastasia Ailamaki, David J. DeWitt, Mark D. Hill, David 
A. Wood: DBMSs on a Modern Processor: Where Does 
Time Go? Proc. VLDB Conf. 1999: 2616-277. 
Anastasia Ailamaki, David J. DeWitt, Mark D. Hill: Weav- 
ing Relations for Cache Performance. Submitted for publi- 
cation, February 2000. 
Gennady Antoshenkov, David B. Lolmet, James Murray: 
Order Preserving Compression. Proc. Int’l Conf. Data Engi- 
neering 1996: 655-663. 
Gennady Antoshenkov: Dictionary-Based Order-Preserving 
String Compression. VLDB Joumal 6( I): 26-39 (1 997). 
Rudolf Bayer, Edward M. McCreight: Organization and 
Maintenance of Large Ordered Index(-s. Acta Informatica, 
Rudolf Bayer, Karl Unterauer: Prefix B-Trees. ACM Trans- 
action on Database Systems 2( 1 ): 1 1-26 (1 977). 
Rudolf Bayer: The Universal B-tree for Multi-dimensional 
Indexing. Technical report Technical Univ. Munich TUM- 
INFO-1 1-96-19637-350 (November 1996). 
Peter A. Boncz, Stefan Manegold, Martin L. Kersten: Data- 
base Architecture Optimized for the New Bottleneck: Mem- 
ory Access. Proc. VLDB Conf. 1999: .54-65 
Trishul M. Chilimbi, Bob Davidson, James R. Lam: 
Cache-Conscious Structure Definition, Proc. ACM SIG- 
PLAN Conf. Prog. Lang. Design and Impl. 1999: 13-24. 
l(3): 173-189 (1972). 
[lo] Trishul M. Chilimbi, Mark D. Hill, James R. Larus: Cache- 
Conscious Structure Layout, Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Conf. 
Prog. Lang. Design and Impl. 1999: 1-1 2. 
[ 111 Jim Gray, Goetz Graefe, The Five-Minute Rule Ten Years 
Later, and Other Computer Storage Rides of Thumb, ACM 
SIGMOD Record 26(4), 1997: 63-68. 
[ 121 Donald E. Knuth: The Art of Computer Programming, 
Vol. 3, 2nd Edition. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA 
(1998). 
[ 131 David Loshin: Efficient Memory Programming. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, NY (1998). 
[14] Chris Nyberg, Tom Barclay, Zarka Cvetanovic, Jim Gray, 
David B. Lomet: Alphasort: A Cache-Sensitive Parallel Ex- 
temal Sort. VLDB Joumal 4(4): 603-6:27 (1995). 
[I51 Jun Rao, Kenneth A. Ross: Cache Conscious Indexing for 
Decision-Support in Main Memory. Proc. VLDB Conf. 
I161 Alan J. Smith: Cache Memories. Computing Surveys, 14(3): 
[17] H. R. Strong, G. Markovsky, and A. K. Chandra: Search 
within a Page. JACM 26(3), 457-482 (1979). 
[ 181 httD://www.transmeta.com/crusoe/technolom. html, Trans- 
meta Corp., Santa Clara, CA. 
1191 Dan E. Willard: Searching Unindexed and Nonuniformly 
Generated Files in log log N Time. SIAM J. Comput. 14(4): 
1999: 78-89. 
473-530 (1982). 
101 3-1029 (1985). 
358 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 12:52:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
