=== PAPER: P23-Khan2010
=== FILENAME: Data Cache Prefetching With DynamicAdaptation.pdf
=== PAGES: 9

--- PAGE 1 ---
© The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The British Computer Society. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Advance Access publication on March 19, 2010 doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxq028
Data Cache Prefetching With
Dynamic Adaptation
Minhaj Ahmad Khan∗
Department of Computer Science, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan
∗Corresponding author: minhajahmad@gmail.com
Modern processors based on VLIW architecture rely heavily on software cache prefetching
incorporated by the compiler . For accurate prefetching different factors such as latencies of the
loop iterations need to be taken into account, which cannot be determined at (static) compile time.
Consequently, the compilers either produce inaccurate prefetches or resort to producing code without
prefetching. Many applications with complex code are therefore unable to perform very well on
the modern processors. In this paper, we present an approach that is able to generate accurate
prefetch instructions by exploiting information available at runtime. The code is instrumented with
prefetches having offsets which may be adapted at runtime through a dynamic code specializer . Such
cache prefetching with dynamic adaptation results in better performance of the applications. The
runtime code generation activity is highly efﬁcient and incurs a very small overhead. The experiments
performed on Itanium-II architecture using icc and gcc compilers produce an average speedup of
2.51% and 2.56%, respectively.
Keywords: code optimization; cache prefetching; dynamic compilation; programming languages; memory
hierarchy optimization
Received 7 June 2009; revised 2 January 2010
Handling editor: Simon Moore
1. INTRODUCTION
To bridge the latency gap between memory and the processor,
modern computer architectures incorporate multiple levels of
memory hierarchy. This gap exists due to rapidly increasing
speed of microprocessors in contrast with the speed of memory
architectures. During execution of an application, the data
required for computation needs to be brought into the processor
cache from the main memory. The availability of data in
the processor cache allows the processor to obtain peak
performance for the application being executed.
Most of the applications suffer from performance degradation
due to large latencies of memory access. In this regard, software
cache prefetching is the technique that causes data to be fetched
from memory into the cache before it is actually used by the
processor. In the meanwhile, other instructions can be scheduled
to execute, thereby mitigating the memory delay that could
otherwise incur due to unavailability of data in the processor
cache. This mechanism results in better performance of the
applications as the cache miss penalties do not occur if the
processor ﬁnds the required data in the cache.
The cache prefetching needs calculation of addresses of data
required by the processor together with the prefetch distance
which refers to the address of the next element that must be
brought into the cache. The prefetch distance mainly depends
upon the latency of cache miss and the latency of the loop
iteration, i.e. the execution time taken by an iteration of the loop
[1–4]. The latency of the loop iteration cannot be determined
(statically) at compile time and, therefore, it results in inaccurate
prefetching of data.
This paper suggests a novel strategy that aims at improving
the cache prefetching through dynamic adaptation. The
latencies are calculated dynamically and the necessary code is
modiﬁed at runtime to produce accurate prefetch instructions.
To accomplish this, the code is ﬁrst instrumented with prefetch
instructions containing offsets. The compiler generates the code
with some instructions that are dependent on these offsets.
These instructions can be traced at compile time and modiﬁed
at runtime to adjust the prefetch distance in accordance with the
latencies of the loop iterations.
The modiﬁcation of code is performed by a runtime
specializer making use of information collected at compile time.
The specializer inserts new values for a few instructions at
precomputed locations of the binary code. Since the specializer
modiﬁes a small number of binary instructions at runtime,
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 2 ---
816 M.A. Khan
the approach incurs a very small overhead. In addition, all
the analyses required for adaptation are performed at compile
time. The reduced runtime overhead and compile time analyses
result in effective cache prefetching and thereby improve the
performance of the applications.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
describes the context of the dynamic cache prefetching strategy.
The steps necessary to implement and automate the approach
of runtime data cache prefetching have been elaborated
in Section 3. Section 4 describes the architecture of the
implementation framework. The experimental setup and results
have been presented in Section 5. Section 6 describes the
existing research work related to cache prefetching followed
by a conclusion and the future work given in Section 7.
2. CONTEXT OF DYNAMIC CACHE PREFETCHING
STRA TEGY
Dynamic cache prefetching is used to bring data into the cache
at runtime, i.e. during the execution of the application. The data
prefetching requires the prefetch distance to be computed which
speciﬁes the address of the next element to be brought into the
cache. The distance depends upon the latency of the loop code.
Unfortunately, the prefetching distance may only be computed
correctly when the latencies of the loop execution are known.
Due to the large runtime overhead of data cache prefetching,
most of the dynamic prefetching strategies [ 2–5] resort to
estimating the distance just like static prefetching strategies,
which is not always beneﬁcial. The dynamic cache prefetching
therefore requires adaptation of distance in accordance with the
runtime behavior.
For instance, consider the code snippet given in Fig. 1. The
latency of a single iteration varies depending upon the condition
given in the loop. The cache prefetching based on the estimates
actually deteriorates the performance due to unpredictable
behavior of the code. This issue can be addressed dynamically
by computing the exact distance for frequently missing loads.
An adapter distance may be initially inserted (statically)
at compile time. For example, for IA-64 architecture, the
instruction of lfetch (&X[i + offset]) may be used to prefetch
data of some variable existing at the distance as computed in
the offset.
If the code is specialized with different values of offsets,
1 we
ﬁnd that the object code versions obtained after compilation are
very much similar. For example, if the same code is specialized
with the offset values of 5 and 7, we obtain two versions of
code as given in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. These versions have
similar code scheduling, register allocation and optimizations
applied to them. The immediate values
2 in the object code
1Integer values generate very similar versions of code after compilation.
These versions are required for the subsequent dynamic adaptation of code.
2The number of such immediate values depends upon the instances of the
offset, unroll factor and the loop versioning.
FIGURE 1. Code snippet with varying latency of its work in a single
iteration.
FIGURE 2. Assembly code generated by icc v 8.0 on IA-64 after
instrumentation with lfetch instructions: (a) code with offset = 5 and
(b) code with offset = 7.
can be regenerated for new distances found at runtime. The
modiﬁcation of code may then result from the adjustment
of the prefetch distance at runtime. This is accomplished by
using a single version termed as template and modifying the
object code instructions through a very efﬁcient code termed as
template specializer, which may adapt dynamically the prefetch
distance existing in the template. Since the template generation,
specializer generation and computation of the locations to be
modiﬁed are entirely performed at (static) compile time, the
runtime overhead is very small.
The prefetching with dynamic adaptation requiring modiﬁ-
cation of a small number of instructions therefore results in
better performance. This approach is in contrast to other exist-
ing dynamic prefetching systems [ 3, 4] which make use of one
or more threads, and generate entirely new code at runtime.
3. APPROACH OF RUNTIME DA TA CACHE
PREFETCHING
The static information available to a compiler is not sufﬁcient
enough to incorporate accurate prefetches in the code. The
compiler decisions are based on heuristics exploiting only static
information. The fact that the behavior of an application differs
in accordance with different input, may make the application
performance to degrade. This limitation cannot be overcome
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 3 ---
Data Cache Prefetching With Dynamic Adaptation 817
by static compilation. Therefore, we address this problem by
performing runtime data cache prefetching.
For data to be prefetched from the main memory to the cache,
different models have been designed. Effective implementations
such as ADORE [ 3] and Trident [ 4] make use of threads to
perform data cache prefetching. These systems require costly
analyses and runtime code generation. The large overhead of
these activities makes the dynamic cache prefetching suitable
only for the code that is to be invoked multiple times.
Our strategy reduces the overhead of dynamic cache
prefetching by generating templates at compile time, thereby
avoiding costly activities such as code generation, allocation of
registers and scheduling of instructions.
The main steps of runtime data cache prefetching are given
below.
(i) A compile time analysis is performed to gather
information about candidate variables.
(ii) A cost/beneﬁt analysis is then performed that takes
into account the runtime overhead that may occur
for dynamic prefetching. Dynamic prefetching is
performed only if the latencies of memory accesses are
larger than the runtime overhead.
(iii) If it is beneﬁcial to perform dynamic prefetching, then
the code is instrumented with prefetch instructions
and the call to the runtime specializer. The code is
compiled with different specialized values of offset,
and one of the versions is selected as a template.A n
analysis of the versions is performed to generate the
specializer code that is able to ﬁll thetemplate slots with
new values during execution. The runtime specializer
requires the calculation of addresses of the template at
which the values are to be modiﬁed. In addition, the new
formulae, based upon which the new values (for runtime
adaptation of offsets) are generated, are also computed
at compile time. These formulae take into account the
(runtime) latency of the loop iterations.
The details of each of the above-mentioned steps are given in
the following subsections.
3.1. Static compile-time activities
The data cache prefetching approach incorporates the selection
of variables, cost/beneﬁt analysis and generation of templates
that are performed at (static) compile time.
3.1.1. Selection of variables
An ofﬂine proﬁle corresponding to the latencies of memory
accesses of the variables (being used in the loops) is generated.
Subsequently, the proﬁle is analyzed and the variables are
selected for prefetching as given below.
Let V ={ v
1,v 2,...,v n} be a set of n variables each with a
sum of latencies Svi computed as follows:
Svi =
Ti∑
k=1
Lk,i ∀i ∈{ 1, 2,...,n }, (1)
where Ti is the number of instances and Lk,i is the latency of
kth instance of the variable vi .
The prefetch of a single cache line may bring multiple
elements into the cache. The variables are therefore grouped,
so that, ∀k ∈{ 1, 2,...,T
i} and ∀j ∈{ 1, 2,...,n },w eh a v e
V = V −{ vj | Lk,j = 0}. (2)
The set of variables V having |V |= q number of elements
now needs to be taken into consideration to be brought into the
cache.
3.1.2. Cost/beneﬁt analysis
To estimate the effectiveness of the cache prefetching with
dynamic adaptation, a cost/beneﬁt analysis is performed. We
take into account the overhead of runtime modiﬁcation of the
binary template. This is computable at compile time since the
overhead related to dynamic activities including calculation of
the distance formula and runtimetemplate modiﬁcation depends
upon the ﬁxed number of instructions to be modiﬁed.
Let R be the runtime overhead (CPU cycles) for dynamic
adaptation. This adaptation requires modiﬁcation of binary
instructions with some activities performed at the beginning
such as setting up the constructs used for modiﬁcation.
Similarly, cache ﬂushing is also required after modiﬁcation of
instructions of the template. Therefore, for p instructions to be
modiﬁed, we have
R = B +
p∑
i=1
Mi + F, (3)
where Mi is the overhead of modifying a single instruction, and
B and F are the overheads3 of initialization and cache ﬂushing,
respectively. Dynamic cache prefetching may be performed
only when the sum of the latencies (of initial instances) is greater
than the overhead that might be incurred, that is,
q∑
i=1
L1,i >R . (4)
As there are large latencies of cache misses, especially for
processors such as Itanium-II, this criterion enables one to
prefetch data for a large size of code.
3.1.3. Generation of template for runtime adaptation
To adapt the prefetch distance dynamically, the offsets with
respect to the base prefetch address are modiﬁed during
3All these quantities are architecture speciﬁc.
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 4 ---
818 M.A. Khan
execution of the application. To accomplish this task, atemplate
is generated. Thetemplate is a generic code that can be converted
at runtime to prefetch data for different latencies of the candidate
loop. It is based on a version that is compiled after providing a
constant offset to the prefetch address, e.g. lfetch(&X[i + 7]).
Once the code is compiled with the known offset, the object
code contains data dependence, which is a function of the known
offset. Within this object code, different immediate constants
are used for adaptation of prefetch addresses. Each immediate
constant generated in the object code due to a known offset is
based on an afﬁne formula of the following form:
I = O ∗A + B, (5)
where A and B are coefﬁcients,
4 and O is the offset with which
the code was compiled. The instruction with the immediate
constant I can be modiﬁed to adapt code with respect to any
other offset. Such adaptation is required when the latencies of
the operations change in the loop. The latency is computed
(by using processor-speciﬁc instructions) at iteration numbers
that are powers of 2, in order to keep the runtime overhead
minimum. This is based on the assumption that for most of
the applications, a large variance in behavior occurs during the
initial time period of execution. In addition, comparison with
powers of 2 may easily be implemented through shift operations
in order to minimize the overhead.
The new runtime offset O
r , computed for the above-
mentioned iterations, is given by the following formula:
Or = Avg. Cache Miss Latency
Avg. Iteration Latency . (6)
During execution, the new immediate value used for
adaptation of the prefetch address is obtained by putting the
value of O
r in the afﬁne formula as given in Equation ( 7). We
have
Ir = Or ∗A + B, (7)
where Ir is the new immediate constant that would replace I in
the instruction (object code).
To calculate the location of each instruction that needs to
be modiﬁed, and to ﬁnd the values of A and B, the code is
compiled with two different offsets. It results in two versions
as given in Fig. 2a and b. An analysis of the two object
code versions (generated with two different offsets) shows that
these versions differ at corresponding locations by immediate
constants.
5 These immediate constants are a function of the
offsets and based on the afﬁne formulae. For two offsets O1
and O2 used to generate two versions having difference at p
4These values are usually based on the unroll factor and data sizes as
incorporated by the compilers, and can easily be found by solving afﬁne
equations.
5A template may only be generated when differences occur in the two
versions at corresponding locations.
FIGURE 3. Runtime view of the code with new prefetch distance as
computed for the new latency of the loop work, with runtime offset
O
r = 6.
locations, we have
Ij = O1 ∗Aj + Bj ∀j ∈{ 1, 2,...,p }, (8)
Ij = O2 ∗Aj + Bj ∀j ∈{ 1, 2,...,p }. (9)
Any of these versions may be used as a template that will
be modiﬁed by the runtime specializer. The template and the
runtime specializer, both will be linked with the application
for execution. The modiﬁcation of instructions of the template
actually facilitates the runtime adaptation with new offsets
based on latencies of the loop iterations. The runtime specializer
will require the addresses of the locations to be modiﬁed, which
are easily found at compile time by comparing the two versions.
Similarly, the coefﬁcients A
j and Bj , ∀j ∈{ 1, 2,...,p }, are
also found at compile time by solving the afﬁne equations of
the two versions.
3.2. Dynamic adaptation
The prefetch distance can be adapted at runtime by ﬁnding the
new value of offset which is computed by taking into account
the latencies of the loop iterations (Equation (6)). Subsequently,
the instructions dependent on the offset are modiﬁed. The
runtime specializer modiﬁes the offset by replacing immediate
values with new values.
For a new offsetO
r , obtained at runtime (using Equation (6)),
we need to modify all the p locations of the template to
replace constants with runtime values. For p locations, the new
immediate constants Irj can be generated by using the afﬁne
formulae (given in Equations ( 8) and (9)), in order to adapt the
code for the runtime offset Or . Therefore, at runtime we have
Irj = Or ∗Aj + Bj ∀j ∈{ 1, 2,...,p }. (10)
Figure 3 shows the code adapted to the new prefetch distance
with the runtime offset of 6. The runtime offset is dependent
upon the latency of the loop iterations, as given in Equation (6).
The latency of the loop iterations is only known during
execution, thereby generating accurate prefetch addresses.
4. IMPLEMENTA TION ARCHITECTURE
A prototype framework has been developed that implements the
steps given in Fig. 4 to perform dynamic cache prefetching with
adaptation.
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 5 ---
Data Cache Prefetching With Dynamic Adaptation 819
Source Code Selection of Variables
Template Code Runtime Template Specializer
Cost/Benefit Analysis
Selected variables
Code Instrumentation
Candidate code 
 for prefetching
Template Generation
Code instrumented 
 with offset
FIGURE 4. Implementation framework for performing dynamic
cache prefetching.
The variables in the loops are selected by taking into account
the memory access latencies as described in Section 3.1.1.
A cost/beneﬁt analysis then estimates the possible gain in
performance that could be achieved by prefetching data. The
approach proceeds for runtime prefetching if the estimated
overhead of data prefetching is less than the performance
improvement due to data prefetching.
Once the variables are selected, the source code is
instrumented with prefetch macros
6 containing two different
offsets resulting in two different versions. Subsequently, the
code is compiled to obtain two versions of object code as shown
in Fig. 2a and b.
The two versions thus obtained differ in immediate constants
at corresponding locations. The code scheduling and the
optimizations incorporated in these versions are similar. The
constants by which the versions differ are actually based on
the offset, and have the form offset ∗A + B.
The offset in the code is replaced with the runtime value that
depends upon the runtime latencies, as given in Section 3.13.
These latencies are computed by instrumenting the code with
hardware instructions that provide the accurate number of CPU
cycles consumed for the execution of code.
Performing a comparison of the two versions exposes the
instructions being used for the calculation of the prefetch
distance. One of these two versions is selected as a template
whose instructions will be modiﬁed at runtime to adapt the code
for the new prefetch distance. For each instruction that differs in
6These macros take as arguments variable names and offsets, and are
inserted outside the loop body and inside the loop to prefetch data.
FIGURE 5. Pseudo-code of the template specializer that adapts the
offset (used in prefetching) by modifying instructions at runtime.
the two versions, the coefﬁcients A and B are found by solving
the equations. The values of A and B are subsequently used
by the runtime specializer (pseudo-code shown in Fig. 5)t o
modify the code at runtime.
With the ModifyAdd macro, the code modiﬁcation requires
storing different values at speciﬁc locations of the binary code.
For the Itanium-II processor, these values are found by using
bitwise operations (depending upon the instruction location in
the instruction bundle), and are subsequently stored. Since these
values are stored in the cache, the modiﬁcation of instructions
is very efﬁcient.
The specializer is also provided with the address of
each instruction to be modiﬁed. The specializer inserts new
immediate values at add instructions as computed by the afﬁne
formula. A runtime view of the template after modiﬁcation of
values for the new runtime offset of 6, has been shown in Fig.3.
After inserting new immediate values, the specializer
performs activities required for cache coherence on the Itanium-
II architecture. All the runtime activities incur a very small
overhead that is amortized by the gain in the prefetching of
data.
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The dynamic cache prefetching approach has been applied to
SPEC benchmarks with reference inputs. The compilers icc v
9.0 and gcc v 4.0 are used on a system having an Itanium-
II processor (with 2 GB RAM, Linux OS installed) for these
experiments.
Figure 6 shows the speedup percentage obtained over gcc
and icc compilers through dynamic prefetching with their
prefetching options disabled.
The benchmarks 173.applu, 179.art and 188.ammp are
able to obtain a good speedup. The better performance is
achieved due to the low overhead incurred at runtime for
performing dynamic prefetching. In addition, static analysis and
the selection criteria deﬁned in our approach further minimize
the overhead by applying prefetching to a small number of
candidates. For the icc compiler, the dynamic prefetching
approach achieves an average speedup of 2.51%, whereas for
the gcc, the approach achieves an average speedup of 2.56%.
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 6 ---
820 M.A. Khan
FIGURE 6. Speedup obtained due to dynamic prefetching applied to SPEC benchmarks, with compiler prefetching disabled.
The cost/beneﬁt analysis incorporated in our approach
enables one to calculate the runtime overhead at compile time.
The criteria is subsequently used for the selection of variables to
estimate a likely gain in performance. With prefetching enabled
by the compilers, there is still (although relatively small)
speedup obtained by the dynamic cache prefetching approach.
For theicc compiler, the dynamic prefetching approach achieves
an average speedup of 1.77%, whereas for thegcc, the approach
achieves an average speedup of 1.83%.
To describe the effectiveness of the dynamic prefetching
approach, a metric cache miss reduction factor (CMRF),
computed as
100 ∗ Reduction in cache misses due to dynamic prefetching
Reduction in cache misses due to compiler prefetching ,
has been shown in Fig. 7. The dynamic prefetching approach
has been able to achieve a signiﬁcant CMRF value which is an
improvement over (static) compile time prefetching strategies.
For theicc compiler, theCMRF value reaches up to 53.65% with
an average of 20.62%. Similarly, for thegcc compiler, theCMRF
value reaches up to 88% with an average of 26.47%. The large
CMRF value shows that the cost/beneﬁt analysis performed at
compile time ﬁnds effective candidates of prefetching.
Figure 8 shows the overhead incurred due to dynamic
cache prefetching for the SPEC benchmarks with respect to
the total execution time. The overhead includes the cost of
modifying the binary instructions and adaptation of prefetching
performed during execution of the application. For benchmarks
such as 179.art, the overhead of dynamic adaptation is small,
thereby resulting in improved performance of the application.
For other benchmarks, the cost of this dynamic adaptation
increases due to large variance in the execution behavior of the
application.
6. RELA TED WORK
Cache prefetching has been widely studied in the past to address
the problem of large memory latencies, which occurs when the
processor requires data from memory.
FIGURE 7. CMRF value calculated for SPEC benchmarks. The large CMRF value shows that the dynamic prefetching with adaptation is much
better than the static prefetching.
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 7 ---
Data Cache Prefetching With Dynamic Adaptation 821
FIGURE 8. Overhead incurred (with respect to total execution time) due to dynamic prefetching applied to SPEC benchmarks.
It was observed that many applications suffer from cache
misses, and so the initial work is oriented toward calculation
of patterns and conditions upon which the prefetching of the
cache may be based. An approach of prefetching was suggested
in [ 6] that was able to detect the references of dense matrices
which could produce cache misses. Due to cache prefetching,
the performance improves up to a factor of 2. Similarly, a stride
prefetching approach was given by Luk et al. [7]. The stride
accesses are traced in order to guide the prefetching of data.
Another approach of theirs performed prefetching of data for
recursive data structures [ 8].
For linked data structures, a data ﬂow analysis has been pro-
posed in [ 5]. The analysis facilitates jump-pointer prefetching,
which is implemented for the Java compiler. Similarly, another
software/hardware-based jump-pointer prefetching approach is
described in [ 9], which stores pointers at nodes at some dis-
tance in order to mitigate the latency of traversing linked data
structures.
Dynamic prefetching approaches have also been imple-
mented in the dynamic optimization systems such as ADORE
[3] and Trident [ 4]. Both of these systems employ continuous
monitoring of applications using separate threads. ADORE is
a system that enables dynamic software cache prefetching for
both data and instruction caches. It is able to trace the execu-
tion of an application and can optimize code based on infor-
mation gathered through hardware counters. This system tracks
the delinquent loads, determines the data reference pattern, cal-
culates the stride and schedules the prefetch instructions. The
trace is converted from intermediate form to binary form and
the code is modiﬁed to be redirected to a new generated trace.
However, for a large trace, the activities may not prove to be
beneﬁcial due to heavyweight code generation and scheduling.
Trident is a system that is similar to our approach in that it adapts
the prefetching to the runtime behavior of the application. The
system detects the hot traces and stores information related to
the delinquent load in a table. For stride-based loads, it inserts
prefetches with a distance of 1, continuously observes the loads
and modiﬁes the distance without generating another trace. The
adaptation continues until there are no more delinquent loads;
however, this continuous process works well only for traces
having a large number of delinquent loads. The runtime activi-
ties and continuous proﬁling at runtime incur a large overhead,
which in turn degrades the performance of the application.
For hardware-based prefetching, the data cache prefetching
with precomputation has been given in [ 10]. Instead of
predicting the prefetch addresses, the instructions producing
the cache misses are precomputed. The dependence graphs
are generated during execution, and are used to obtain the
addresses of the load/store instructions. This approach improves
the performance of the applications by 13%. It differs from our
approach, where all the analyses are performed at compile time,
thereby incurring minimum overhead at runtime. Similarly,
another approach of speculative precomputation is introduced
in [ 2]. For prefetching data, this approach uses idle threads
to beneﬁt from multi-threaded architectures for sequential
applications, and produces an average speedup of 76%.
Other prefetching strategies [ 11–14] improve the thread-based
architectures for reducing the latency of memory access through
prefetching. In contrast with these approaches, our approach
of dynamic prefetching with adaptation does not require the
support of multiple threads in order to prefetch data, thereby
increasing the portability of its implementation to a large
number of processors.
Our previous approaches of dynamic code specialization [15–
17] incur a relatively small overhead for optimization, however,
these approaches do not target data cache prefetching. These
strategies incorporate the concept of template specialization
by modifying the binary code at runtime. The decision of
optimization is left to the compiler after the specialization of
code. In contrast to these approaches, the cache prefetching
with the dynamic adaptation approach suggested in this paper
is not dependent upon the compiler.
Other dynamic optimization systems such as Fabius [ 18],
Tempo [19, 20] or other approaches given in [ 21–24] exploit
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 8 ---
822 M.A. Khan
runtime information to optimize code during execution of the
application. Since dynamic code generation requires analyses
at runtime, these approaches incur a very large overhead. This
overhead may only be amortized when the optimized code is
invoked multiple times.
7. CONCLUSION
This paper presents an approach that exploits runtime
information for accurate prefetching of data. Dynamic cache
prefetching is adapted during execution to work in accordance
with varying latencies of loop iterations.
For variables selected after analysis, the code is instrumented
with prefetch instructions. The prefetch address contains offsets
that are adapted at runtime by a specializer. The code is
then compiled with known offsets to generate a template.A n
analysis is subsequently performed to search for instructions
of the template that must be modiﬁed to adapt prefetches to
new latencies. The runtime specialization incurs a very small
overhead since a few instructions are modiﬁed and all analyses
are performed at (static) compile time.
The accurate and timely prefetching of data results in
reduction of cache misses and thereby produces signiﬁcant
improvement in the performance. For SPEC benchmarks, the
approach enables one to produce an overall average speedup of
2.17%. In addition, the dynamic prefetching approach reduces
cache misses by an average of 23.54% in comparison with static
cache prefetching performed by compilers.
As future work, the approach is being extended to incorporate
some effective transformations in the runtime specialization
system. This would result in better performance by exploiting
more runtime information obtained during execution of the
application.
REFERENCES
[1] Lu, J., Chen, H., Fu, R., Hsu, W.-C., Othmer, B., Y ew, P .-C. and
Chen, D.-Y . (2003) The Performance of Runtime Data Cache
Prefetching in a Dynamic Optimization System. MICRO 36:
Proc. 36th Annual IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture ,
Washington, DC, USA, p. 180. IEEE Computer Society.
[2] Collins, J.D., Wang, H., Tullsen, D.M., Hughes, C., Lee, Y .-F.,
Lavery, D. and Shen, J.P . (2001) Speculative Precomputation:
Long-Range Prefetching of Delinquent Loads. ISCA’01: Proc.
28th Annual Int. Symp. Computer Architecture , New Y ork, NY ,
USA, pp. 14–25. ACM.
[3] Lu, J., Chen, H., Y ew, P .-C. and Hsu, W.-C. (2004) Design and
implementation of a lightweight dynamic optimization system.
J. Instr .-Level Parallelism, 6, 103–126.
[4] Zhang, W., Calder, B. and Tullsen, D. (2005) An Event-Driven
Multithreaded Dynamic Optimization Framework. Int. Conf.
Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT), St.
Louis, MO, USA, September.
[5] Cahoon, B. and McKinley, K.S. (2001) Data Flow Analysis for
Software Prefetching Linked Data Structures in Java. Int. Conf.
Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques , Barcelona,
Spain, pp. 280–291.
[6] Mowry, T.C., Lam, M.S., and Gupta, A. (1992) Design and
Evaluation of a Compiler Algorithm for Prefetching. Proc. Fifth
Int. Conf. Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 62–73.
[7] Luk, C.-K., Muth, R., Patil, H., Weiss, R., Lowney, P .G. and
Cohn, R. (2002) Proﬁle-Guided Post-Link Stride Prefetching.
ICS’02: Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Supercomputing , New Y ork, NY ,
USA, pp. 167–178. ACM.
[8] Luk, C.-K. and Mowry, T.C. (1996) Compiler-Based Prefetching
for Recursive Data Structures. Proc. Seventh Int. Conf. Architec-
tural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Sys-
tems, Cambridge, MA, USA, pp. 222–233.
[9] Roth,A. and Sohi, G.S. (1999) Effective jump-pointer prefetching
for linked data structures. SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News , 27,
111–121.
[10] Jignesh, M.A., Patel, J.M. and Davidson, E.S. (2001) Data
Prefetching by Dependence Graph Precomputation. Proc. 28th
Annual Int. Symp. Computer Architecture , Goteborg, Sweden,
pp. 52–61. ACM.
[11] Luk, C.-K. (2001) Tolerating Memory Latency Through
Software-Controlled Pre-execution in Simultaneous Multithread-
ing Processors. ISCA’01: Proc. 28th Annual Int. Symp. Computer
Architecture, New Y ork, NY , USA, pp. 40–51. ACM.
[12] Collins, J., Sair, S., Calder, B. and Tullsen, D.M. (2002) Pointer
Cache Assisted. 35th Int. Symp. Microarchitecture , Istanbul,
Turkey, pp. 62–73. IEEE Computer Society.
[13] Roth, A. and Sohi, G.S. (2001) Speculative Data-Driven Mul-
tithreading. HPCA’01: Proc. 7th Int. Symp. High-Performance
Computer Architecture , Washington, DC, USA, p. 37. IEEE
Computer Society.
[14] Zilles, C. and Sohi, G. (2001) Execution-Based Prediction Using
Speculative Slices. ISCA’01: Proc. 28th Annual Int. Symp.
Computer Architecture, New Y ork, NY , USA, pp. 2–13. ACM.
[15] Khan, M.A. (2009) Feedback-directed specialization of code.
Comput. Lang., Syst. Struct. , 35, 1–10.
[16] Khan, M.A., Charles, H.-P . and Barthou, D. (2008) An Effective
Automated Approach to Specialization of Code. Proc. 20th Int.
Workshop on Languages and Compilers for Parallel Computing,
11–14 October 2007, Urbana, IL, USA.
[17] Khan, M.A., Charles, H.-P . and Barthou, D. (2007) Reducing
Code Size Explosion Through Low-Overhead Specialization.
Proc. 11th Annual Workshop on the Interaction between
Compilers and Computer Architecture, Phoenix, February.
[18] Leone, M. and Lee, P . (1998) Dynamic specialization in the
Fabius system. ACM Comput. Surv., 30, 23–23.
[19] Noel, F., Hornof, L., Consel, C. and Lawall, J.L. (1998) Auto-
matic, Template-Based Run-Time Specialization: Implementa-
tion and Experimental Study. Int. Conf. Computer Languages
(ICCL’98), Chicago, USA, February.
[20] Consel, C., Hornof, L., Noel, F., Noyé, J. and V olanschi, N.
(1996) A Uniform Approach for Compile-Time and Run-Time
Specialization. Partial Evaluation. Int. Seminar, Dagstuhl Castle,
Germany, pp. 54–72. Springer, Berlin, Germany.
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 9 ---
Data Cache Prefetching With Dynamic Adaptation 823
[21] Leone, M. and Lee, P . (1996) A Declarative Approach to Run-
Time Code Generation. Workshop on Compiler Support for
System Software (WCSSS), Arizona, USA, February.
[22] Grant, B., Mock, M., Philipose, M., Chambers, C. and Eggers, S.J.
(1997) Annotation-Directed Run-Time Specialization in C.Proc.
ACM SIGPLAN Symp. Partial Evaluation and Semantics-Based
Program Manipulation (PEPM’97), Amsterdam, Netherlands,
June, pp. 163–178. ACM.
[23] Engler, D. (1996) Vcode: A Retargetable, Extensible,
V ery Fast Dynamic Code Generation System. Proc. ACM
SIGPLAN 96 Conf. Programming Language Design
and Implementation , Pennysylvania, USA, pp. 160–170.
ACM.
[24] Leone, M. and Dybvig, R.K. (1997) Dynamo: A Staged Compiler
Architecture for Dynamic Program Optimization. Technical
Report, Indiana University.
The Computer Journal , V ol. 54 No. 5, 2011
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/54/5/815/543793 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026

