=== PAPER: P26-ZhangFGCS2024
=== FILENAME: Aprefetching indexingschemeforin-memorydatabasesystems.pdf
=== PAGES: 12

--- PAGE 1 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
Available online 5 March 2024
0167-739X/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Future Generation Computer Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fgcs
Review article
A prefetching indexing scheme for in-memory database systems✩
Qian Zhang ∗, Haoyun Song, Kaiyan Zhou, Jianhao Wei, Chuqiao Xiao
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, 200062, Shanghai, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Main memory
Prefetching
Database systems
Multi-versioning
Indexing scheme
A B S T R A C T
In-memory databases (IMDBs) store all working data in the main memory, making memory access the dominant
factor in system performance. Moreover, for modern multi-version systems, the extended version chain makes
the access pattern more complex, putting extra pressure on indexing. Our micro-architectural profiling results
of existing IMDB indexing schemes show that over half of the execution time goes to memory stalls caused by
pointer chasing operations.
This paper proposes a prefetching indexing scheme for modern in-memory database systems. This scheme
achieves high performance in the presence of serial accesses in pointer chasing. The essential idea is to use a
path prefetcher and a jump pointer prefetcher to hide cache miss latencies induced by indexing searches on
versioned tuples. Specifically, this scheme works by associating a read counter with each block and updating
the counters in the search keys’ access paths. To generate the optimal paths for future prefetches, we present
how to continuously evolve the frequent access paths by analyzing those access patterns. Also, we create a
jump pointer for each tuple in the leaf nodes to prefetch the head of its version chain. We present a jump
pointer queue to accelerate linear version traversal. We achieve the high update performance because our
improved search speed more than offsets any increase in prefetching overhead. Evaluations show that the
prefetching indexing scheme outperforms the state-of-the-art indexing scheme by up to 70%.
1. Introduction
In the last decade, with the DRAM density increasing and the price
per gigabyte decreasing, commodity servers with hundreds of gigabytes
of DRAM have been prevailing. Many in-memory database systems
(IMDBs) [ 1–10] have been developed by enterprises and academic
institutions to meet the in-time data analysis and decision-making
needs in many important applications [ 11–18]. IMDBs could provide
high throughput rates and low latency. It is because, in such a system,
the whole database resides in random access memory.
Most IMDBs employ a multi-version concurrency control (MVCC)
scheme to achieve efficient transaction management to maximize par-
allelism without sacrificing serializability [ 3,5,7–10,17,19,20]. Under
MVCC, updates never block reads. An update operation produces a
new version of the updated data item and invalidates the predecessor
version. All versions of the tuple form a pointer-based version chain
(i.e., linked list). Read operations simply use a timestamp to read the
visible version of the tuple at the time the query starts.
Also, to reduce update pressure in indexes, these database systems
have employed latch-free indirection arrays. The database system uses a
✩ This work is supported by National NSF of China (61572194,61672233).
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: 52184501012@stu.ecnu.edu.cn (Q. Zhang), 51255902184@stu.ecnu.edu.cn (H. Song), 51255902111@stu.ecnu.edu.cn (K. Zhou),
52215902007@stu.ecnu.edu.cn (J. Wei), 52184501011@stu.ecnu.edu.cn (C. Xiao).
1 https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/vtune-profiler/cookbook/2023-2/false-sharing.html
fixed identifier that does not change for each tuple in its index entry. It
uses an indirection layer to map the identifier to the head of the tuple’s
version chain. This approach avoids the problem of having to update
the table index to point to a new physical address whenever a tuple
is modified. Only the mapping entry needs to change each time. Most
of all, a single compare-and-swap operation suffices to install a new
version of the tuple without the use of heavy-weight locking methods.
Generally speaking, a root-to-leaf traversal is always needed to
search for a key in the tree-like indexes; the nodes in the traversal
path are visited sequentially. Moreover, the indirection layer, in com-
bination with the prolonged version chain, exercises extra pressure
on the index searches. The current indexing scheme heavily relies on
pointer-intensive data structures, i.e., trees and linked lists; pointer
chasing is a fundamental behavior [ 21,22]. While pointers ease the
dynamic inserts/updates/deletes in IMDBs, pointer chasing can be inef-
ficient within the CPU, as it introduces several sources of performance
degradation [23–29]. For example, irregular access patterns cause fre-
quent memory stalls due to low data locality. Dependent sequential
memory access limits the available instruction level and memory level
parallelism.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2024.03.012
Received 24 August 2023; Received in revised form 27 February 2024; Accepted 2 March 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
180
Q. Zhang et al.
Fig. 1. Profiling results of pointer chasing codes vs. the rest of application codes when
running YCSB-A workload (50% searches and 50% updates) on DBx1000 with different
Intel Xeon processors, i.e., E-2224G(2017) and Gold 5218R(2019).
To quantify the performance impact of chasing pointers in real-
world workloads, we run YCSB benchmarks [ 30] on DBx1000 [ 7],
which is a popular open-source in-memory database system. We test
different workloads for hardware profiling. The hardware profiling is
carried out separately on different Intel Xeon processors, i.e., E-2224G
and Gold 5218R. We use Intel R⃝VTune™ profiling tool1 to profile the
database server process and analyze execution time and cache misses
breakdowns. We run each evaluation for 5 minutes after it reaches a
steady state. We profile the critical pointer chasing codes within the
application separately from other parts of the application codes. Fig. 1
shows how pointer chasing compares to the rest of the application re-
garding execution time, data TLB cache misses per 10-kilo instructions
(MPTKI), and the ratio of last-level cache (LLC) miss cycles to the total
cycles.
On the processor E-2224G, we set up the database size with 1 GB.
For each run, we spawn one thread and execute 100 million opera-
tions. On the processor Gold-5218R with a larger L3 cache, we set up
the database size with 10 GB. For each run, we spawn ten threads
and execute 100 million operations. Each bar in Fig. 1 is divided
into four categories: root-to-leaf, indirection-layer, version-chain, and
others. We make three significant observations. First, under both work-
loads, DBx1000 spends a significant fraction of its total execution time
(75% and 82%, respectively) on pointer chasing, causing dependent
cache misses. Second, we find that indirection-layer and version-chain
increase the overall pointer chasing overhead, leading to a higher
number of TLB misses (60% in E-2224G and 53% in Gold-5218R)
and much higher cache miss rates (56% in E-2224G and 57% in
Gold-5218R). Third, when running in a more recent processor, pointer
chasing operations are also largely bound by main memory.
In this paper, we study the prefetching indexing scheme, which
uses prefetching to limit the exposed miss latency. We implement the
prefetching indexing scheme on DBx1000 in-memory database, and
make it open-source. 2 In summary, this paper makes the following
contributions:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to deeply
explore how prefetching can accelerate search operations for
in-memory MVCC database indexing.
• We combine a path prefetcher with a jump pointer prefetcher
and propose the prefetching indexing scheme for hiding the
memory latency induced by version searches.
• We achieve better performance on updates because our im-
proved search speed more than offsets any increase in prefetch-
ing overhead.
• We begin to present a theoretical analysis of the memory access
cost. Then, we perform experiments to compare our scheme with
the state-of-the-art scheme, and prefetching indexing scheme
outperforms the existing approach by 20% ∼ 70% under YCSB
workloads.
2 https://github.com/gitzhqian/DBx1000_prefetching.git
Fig. 2. Search in MVCC databases.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 dis-
cusses the storage architecture of in-memory database systems and the
challenges in the state-of-the-art indexing scheme. Section 3 presents
the design of the prefetching indexing scheme. Section 4 presents
the experimental evaluation results. Section 5 presents related work.
Section 6 gives a detailed discussion of future research. This paper is
concluded in Section 7.
2. Background and challenges
2.1. Storage architecture
For IMDBs, main memory is the primary storage location. Under
MVCC, the system maintains multiple physical tuple versions of each
tuple in the database. All MVCC database systems keep the database’s
versioning information separate from its indexes. The memory storage
area for tables is split into multiple data blocks. A mapping table serves
as an indirection layer that maps logical block IDs to physical data
block addresses. Data blocks are always accessed via a mapping table
lookup. Each data block consists of a set of slots. The system stores
the tables’ tuple versions in these slots, and tuple versions are unsorted
within those data blocks.
Fig. 2 shows a simple user salary table. The table has three columns:
ID (primary key), Name, and Salary. A tuple version includes a link
pointer and header fields. A tuple version’s valid time is defined by
timestamps stored in the Begin-ts and End-ts fields in the header. The
example table has a B +-tree index on ID. The leaf nodes of the B +-
tree store pointers to tuples. If a tuple has multiple versions, the tuple
versions are linked together using a link field in the tuples, and the
index always points to the first version (HEAD) on the version chain.
The system uses an indirection layer (arrays) that maps each tuple
to the head of its version chain. Then, the index entry points to the
tuple’s mapping entry instead of its physical location. It can reduce
index maintenance costs significantly because only the mapping entry
needs to change each time. However, for each tuple search, the indirec-
tion layer incurs additional pointer-chasing operations, making reads
slower.
Suppose updating an existing tuple; the system first acquires an
empty slot from the table for the new tuple version. It then copies
the data of the current version to the new version. Finally, it applies
the modifications to the tuple in the newly allocated version slot and
installs the new version as the version chain HEAD. After that, the
mapping entry of the indirection would be changed to point to the new
version, while the index entry would not need to be updated.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
181
Q. Zhang et al.
Table 1
A summary of the design decisions made for the sate-of-the-art IMDBs’ indexing
schemes. (-: Irrelevant or Incompatible.).
Tree-Index Multi-Version Version
Structure Storage Scheme Referencing
Silo [1,2] mass-tree copy-on-write directness
Hekaton [3] bw-tree append-tuples indirection
Peloton [5] bw-tree append-tuples indirection
Ermia [8] mass-tree append-tuples indirection
Cicada [9] mass-tree append-tuples best-effort
inlining
InnoDB [10] b +-tree delta-tuples inlining
Postgres [10] b +-tree append-tuples indirection
DBx1000 b +-tree append-tuples indirection
[7,32,33]
Hyper – delta-tuples versioned
[4,31] positions
LeanStore [6] b +-tree – –
2.2. Challenges for prefetching search
Previous work has surveyed index types of major commercial and
academic in-memory DBMSs and found that B+-tree is the most popular
index type. We will focus on B +-tree in this work. Table 1 summarizes
the characteristics of the state-of-the-art IMDBs’ indexing schemes [1–
10,31–33]. (1) Tree-index data structure: presents default index struc-
ture type. Both Bw-tree and Mass-tree are B+-tree variations. (2) Multi-
version storage scheme : specifies how the system stores these ver-
sions generated by the transaction’s update operations. (3) Version
referencing: used to map index entries to tuple versions in base ta-
bles. Considering the characteristics of modern storage technologies,
append-tuples version storage and indirection are preferable, due to
lower write amplification and higher parallelism. However, it tends to
cause massive read amplification for mixed workloads.
Fig. 2 shows how IMDBs perform a search over versioned tuples.
For example, transaction Txn-52 invokes a read operation on ID = 101,
the system searches for a physical version (...,50,55, . . . ,101,Tom,10)
where Txn-52 is in between the range of the Begin-ts and End-ts fields.
It must first follow the path ❶ (root-to-leaf ) and visit six nodes in the
path sequentially. Then, it must look up the path ❷ (indirection layer )
and fetch the version chain HEAD according to the address. Thirdly, it
must process a linear traversal of tuple versions following the path ❸
(long version chain ).
On the one hand, generally, to find a visible tuple version of the
transaction, a path❶-to-path❷-to-path❸ traversal is always needed; the
nodes in the traversal path are visited sequentially. On the other hand,
even for updating or deleting a tuple, it always needs to locate a tuple
version chain HEAD. Moreover, most systems implement the Pointers
as logical pointers, such as Tuple ID (a unique 64-bit tuple identifier
comprised of block ID and offset); a hash table lookup is needed
for each tuple version accessed. Such an indexing structure poses a
significant challenge for prefetching because the version searches suffer
from pointer-chasing problems [22].
Several earlier pointer-based prefetching approaches focused on
prefetching for linked lists or trees, such as [21,25,26,34,35]. However,
due to the vast diversity of traversal paths, it would not work well for
IMDB indexing structures. Different from other simple data structures,
on the one hand, the access sequence of IMDBs indexing searches is
highly dependent on the input data, i.e., the search key, which almost
cannot be predicted efficiently. On the other hand, the access patterns
are more irregular. For example, the volume of tuple versions grows
exponentially while the search is in the probing phase. It increases the
difficulty of prefetching for IMDB indexing searches.
3. Design
We propose a practical approach to address two challenges in
designing IMDBs prefetching indexing: identifying and predicting the
access patterns by utilizing an online query monitor and accelerating
pointer chasing using a path prefetcher combined with a jump pointer
prefetcher. In this section, we first present a design overview of the
prefetching indexing scheme. Then, we explain how to track the blocks
that are accessed by each online query, how we use this information to
generate prefetch candidates, and how we use jump pointer prefetching
to accelerate linear version traversal. Lastly, we describe the database
operations and cost analysis.
3.1. Overview
The design of the proposed prefetching indexing scheme is based on
three observations.
First, recent hardware improvements can provide better perfor-
mance to IMDBs with low overhead, such as very large DRAMs with
Terabytes (TBs) capacity, high memory bandwidth, and larger last-level
cache (LLC/L3 cache) [36–38]. However, the cache-to-memory latency
gap can be a significant performance bottleneck for programs working
on large data sets with poor data locality. An efficient approach that
can reduce the number of cache misses and the impact of cache misses
is desirable for improving search performance in in-memory MVCC
systems.
Second, different from the linked list data structure, the access
sequence of the tree structure is highly dependent on the search key,
which increases the difficulty of prefetching for searches. Under those
workloads in modern database applications, on the one hand, the latest
tuples are likely to be frequently accessed (select/update) during a
period [5]. On the other hand, searches of adjacent keys tend to follow
similar traversal paths since keys are stored in sorted order [39]. Note
that there are common blocks between their traversal paths. Then, the
read counters of index blocks are necessary to make informed decisions
on which blocks to be appended to the prefetch candidates.
Third, as prior studies demonstrated, many undesirable side-effects
of MVCC result from a growing volume of tuple versions. Most database
systems implement the version chain as a linked list using the tuples’
pointer field. The pointer either points to the next tuple version in the
chain or is null if there is none. To accelerate version chain traversal,
we must first overcome the pointer-chasing problem.
Fig. 3 shows the logical overview of the prefetching indexing
scheme. It consists of three components: online query monitor, access
path prefetcher, and jump pointer prefetcher. We make the following
design decisions.
Employ Path Prefetcher policy for tree search. Better perfor-
mance can be achieved if each processing thread efficiently identifies
and predicts the access pattern of tree index search operations. We
employ an access path prefetcher policy for tree search. To make this
policy work, we present three designs. For a search key 101, let a pathP
be a sequence of non-leaf nodes that are generated during tree traversal.
Then, 𝑃 = {𝑝(𝑙, 𝑖)|1 < 𝑙 < ℎ − 1}, 𝑝(𝑙, 𝑖) represents the paths of accessing
𝑖th node at level l.
• Cache Prefetching: During the traversal, before starting a binary
search on a node within the 𝑝(𝑙, 𝑖), we prefetch all of the cache
lines that comprise the node.
• Path Prefetching: Before starting a search from the root node to
the leaf node 𝑃 , we prefetch the node blocks that comprise the
sequence.
• Monitor Prefetching: We collect recent query statistics by lever-
aging a lightweight monitor that tracks the inner nodes that are
accessed by each query. Then, those samples will be used to
produce Prefetch Table , which records the frequent access paths
for the future prefetches, e.g., { 𝑝(1, 𝑖 − 2), 𝑝(1, 𝑖 − 1), 𝑝(1, 𝑖), 𝑝(1, 𝑖 +
1), 𝑝(1, 𝑖 + 2)}.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
182
Q. Zhang et al.
Fig. 3. The logical overview of prefetching indexing scheme.
Implement Leveled Query Monitoring according to the read
counters. Each inner node has a read counter that is increased when
the node receives a read request. An optimal query monitoring strategy
should compute the total samples with the read counters. However,
the overhead of computing the total samples offsets the benefit of the
optimal strategy. Thus, we use a leveled query monitor to reduce the
monitoring overhead. For the 𝐿1 level of the tree, the monitor gathers
statistics and dynamically generates the d (prefetching distance, in
units of blocks to prefetch ahead) candidates according to the read
counters. All inner nodes will be treated as prefetch candidates for the
other levels.
Build Jump Pointer Prefetcher to accelerate in-chain version
lookup. Since version traversal is commonly referred to as pointer
chasing, we create a jump pointer queue ( Prefetch Queue) and use it to
accelerate linear version traversal. During an iteration of the 𝑣𝑖+2, the
prefetcher directly prefetches 𝑣𝑖 using two-ahead jump pointers. It can
significantly improve the performance of pointer chasing by decreasing
the number of expensive misses.
3.2. Path prefetcher
3.2.1. Cache prefetching
Cache prefetching is a common technique to overcome the speed
gap between processor and memory and hide off-chip memory latency.
There are two typical cache prefetching strategies: reducing the number
of cache misses and reducing the impact of cache misses. Generally, a
database workload exceeds the cache capacity, and the first strategy
is to remove cache misses by improving data spatial locality. A well-
known example is cache-conscious data layout, such as PAX [40], Data
Morphing [41], and FSM [5] storage models. They need to modify the
placement of data items so that references to multiple data items from
the same cache line occur closely in time without incurring additional
cache misses. Then, data reorganization should be controlled carefully
to avoid false negatives. Moreover, cache misses can also result from
accessing data for cold searches.
In this work, we focus on the second general strategy. The goal
is to make cache misses less expensive by exploiting memory sys-
tem parallelism. Modern processors allow multiple outstanding cache
misses to be in flight simultaneously within the memory hierarchy and
support prefetch instructions to load data into different levels of CPU
caches [37]. We leverage the prefetch instructions to hide cache miss
latencies.
Code Snippet 1(a) depicts the standard binary search in an inner
node of the tree. For the𝐵+-tree, each inner node contains 8Bkey fields
and 8B childptr fields. Consistent with previous studies [42], we use the
optimal node width 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑙 for the cache prefetching. Our experiments
show that the optimal node width is eight cache lines. Then, as depicted
in Code Snippet 1(b), before starting a binary search, we issue prefetch
instructions to read the data into the L3 cache (see Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Code Snippets 1: (a) standard binary search in a inner node. (b) binary search
with cache prefetching.
Fig. 5. Structure of Read Counters and Index.
3.2.2. Online query monitoring
We use a query monitor that tracks the blocks that are accessed by
each query. The goal is to record reads to inner nodes (block); each
block is associated with a read counter, and its value is increased by
one when the block receives a read request. During the monitoring,
search keys’ access paths will be recorded in Search Block Table .
There are two alternative approaches to how the counters can
be managed. First, the counter can be stored inside each block by
utilizing the first 8 bytes of this block. The counter migrates to the
newly allocated block as the key is redistributed. Take insertion as
an example. When a leaf node splits, keys must be redistributed to
addresses. If this split succeeds, two new child nodes and a new parent
node are in the 𝐵+-tree structure. We can copy the current counter
value to the newly allocated blocks.
One drawback of this approach is that when the counters of the
child nodes are updated, cascading updates are propagated to higher-
level nodes. This side effect makes it difficult to manage the counters
efficiently. Another one is that we must perform a complete root-to-
leaf traversal when gathering statistics from these blocks. However, this
expensive operation should be avoided.
Second, the counters can be stored in a separate space and accessed
by array indexes. During the query monitoring, the requested blocks
of search keys are recorded in the Search Block Table . Then, a worker
thread will build an index on the read counters based on these statistics.
By looking up the index, the prefetcher can quickly determine which
blocks to prefetch in the future.
Fig. 5 shows the structure of the index. The tree’s inner nodes
(block) are segmented by the tree levels. Each segment is organized
as an array. The array index structure consists of ptr fields. Ptr points
to the head node of the counter array, which stores read counters for
the blocks of each level. The index nodes are sorted by block addresses.
The second strategy offers two advantages over the first one. On
the one hand, accessing the counter array takes O(1) time to get the
counters by block number. On the other hand, the counters do not need
to migrate as the blocks are allocated or freed. The counters are updated
when the search reaches. In case of insertions, the worker thread will
adjust the index structure dynamically.
3.2.3. Path prefetching
In in-memory MVCC databases, tree index data structures will never
change with update operations of keys. The access paths of search
keys will also never change. Given this observation, there is a naïve
prefetching algorithm.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
183
Q. Zhang et al.
Algorithm 1: Monitor Prefetching Algorithm.
1 Function MonitorPrefetching(recent searches K,
representative paths P )
2 #Stage 1: Clustering algorithm ;
3 foreach all keys k appearing in K do
4 foreach all representative keys 𝑟𝑘 within P do
5 if (𝑟𝑘 is closest to k) then 𝑟𝑘 ← 𝑟𝑘 + 𝑤 × (𝑘 − 𝑟𝑘) ;
6 end
7 end
8 #Stage 2: Round-Robin algorithm ;
9 Generate prefetch instructions for 𝐿1 using r;
10 end
For each table index in the database, the system maintains statistics
about the recent queries that have accessed it. For each query, the
system extracts its accessed blocks, counter, and search keys. The path
prefetcher periodically computes and identifies access paths for search
keys using those query statistics. Over time, the Prefetch Table will hold
all the keys’ access paths.
When a search key normally hits the Prefetch Table , the prefetcher
will prefetch all the blocks in the access paths. Only the blocks in the
start part of the access path will be prefetched if partial hits.
3.2.4. Monitor prefetching
Holding all the keys’ access paths online is infeasible in practice. We
next describe how to compute workload-optimized access paths.
Computing the optimal access paths for a workload based on its
query statistic requires exponential space and time in the number of
blocks. Consider a 𝐵+-tree of 7 height and each inner node with 16
key/childptr pairs. The total number of inner nodes is 248,760, and the
block size of 𝐿1 level is 121MB (>L3 cache size).
Then, we adopt a more resource-efficient prefetching algorithm that
converges toward the optimal access paths over time. Our approach
leverages query statistics to compute the paths in two stages. As shown
in Algorithm 1, it first employs a clustering algorithm to determine
which blocks should be treated as candidates. It then uses a Round-
Robin algorithm that uses the output of the clustering algorithm to
generate workload-aware access path prefetch instructions.
For each search key, the clustering algorithm observes the accessed
blocks and assigns them to the 𝑗th cluster, whose mean representative
query 𝑟𝑘 is most similar to k. The distance metric between two keys
is defined as the number of common blocks of their traversal paths.
Keys that access many common blocks, therefore, tend to belong to the
same cluster. After assigning the search key to a cluster, it updates 𝑟𝑘
to reflect the inclusion of the search key. The algorithm prioritizes each
key path based on its total read counters, 𝑤(𝑘) = ∑ℎ−1
1 (𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 ).
The weight w determines the rate with which the algorithm forgets the
older path samples.
In addition, the cluster’s mean is a vector of block/counter pairs
(comprised of the Prefetch Table) whose length is less than the 0.35 ×𝐿3
cache size. Over time, the means of the clusters drift towards the recent
samples. Roughly speaking, we can estimate this L3-limited prefetching
distance as 𝑑 = 𝑝×𝐵𝐿3
𝐵𝐼𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒
, where p is the percentage of L3 capacity
occupied, 𝐵𝐿3 is the number of bytes of the L3 cache, and 𝐵𝐼𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒 is
the number of bytes per inner node. With the clustering algorithm, the
system maintains the frequent d candidates for future prefetches.
3.3. Jump pointer prefetcher
For in-memory database systems, the typical tuple version layout is
shown in Fig. 6 (a). The tuple version chain is organized as a linked
list. Most systems store the newest tuple version as the version chain’s
HEAD. The version consists of a header and links fields. The txn-id
Fig. 6. Version Chain with jump pointers.
field serves as the version’s write lock. The following two fields are the
begin-ts and end-ts, representing the tuple version’s lifetime. The next
pointer field links the tuple version nodes together. The content field
stores the tuple version data. To perform a read operation on a tuple A,
the system searches for a visible version by comparing a transaction’s
read-timestamp with the begin-ts and end-ts fields.
As illustrated in Fig. 6 (b), assuming that the version 𝑣𝑖 is visible
to the currently active transaction t, when the leaf node is visited, we
would like to launch a prefetch of 𝑣𝑖. We would generally follow the
next pointer through the indirection-layer, 𝑣ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟, . . . ,𝑣𝑖+3, 𝑣𝑖+2, and
𝑣𝑖+1 before the prefetch of 𝑣𝑖 could be launched. However, fetching
each node would incur much more full miss latency. There is a jump
pointer prefetching algorithm to solve the pointer-chasing problem.
This approach involves creating a new pointer field for each version,
i.e., jump pointer, which points from a version to the one it should
prefetch. For example, Fig. 6 (b) shows how𝑣𝑖+2 could directly prefetch
𝑣𝑖 using a two-ahead jump pointer. The goal is to ensure that by the
time the iteration is ready to visit a version, that version is already
prefetched into the cache, thereby hiding much miss latency of 𝑣𝑖.
In this work, we will build upon the concept of jump pointers but
customize them to the specific needs of version chains. First, we pull
all version nodes’ addresses into a separate contiguous space called
the jump pointer queue, as illustrated in Fig. 6 (c). Second, to initiate
prefetching, a new pointer field of the search key within the leaf node
is used to locate the version chain’s HEAD. Then, before starting the
traversal of the version chain, we can issue prefetches for the first
n versions. Using the jump pointer queue is more flexible than jump
pointers stored directly in the tuple version bodies. We can adjust the
prefetching distance by simply changing the offset used within the
queue.
The critical issue in implementing a jump pointer queue is gracefully
handling updates. The version chain’s HEAD changes whenever a tuple
is modified. One can avoid this problem through the queue’s cursor,
which always points to the physical address of the tuple’s version
header. With this setup, the jump pointer of a search key within the
leaf node points to the cursor of its jump pointer queue instead of the
version header’s physical address. In addition, in our implementation,
the queue is broken into a chunked linked list, which allows us to
limit the impact of a version insertion to its corresponding chunk. We
configure the chunk size as 8 (one cache line) in our experiments.
3.4. Operations
Update: Most transactions update the latest version of a tuple. Since
an index search is first performed to locate the position for an update

--- PAGE 6 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
184
Q. Zhang et al.
operation, all of the blocks on the access path from the root-to-leaf
to the version chain’s HEAD are already in the cache before the real
update processing. When updating an existing tuple, the transaction
first creates a new version if no active transaction holds the current
version’s write lock and its transaction ID is larger than the current
version’s last reader field value. If these conditions are satisfied, the
system acquires an empty slot from the table for the new version. It then
copies the content of the current version to the new version. Finally, it
applies the modifications to the tuple in the newly allocated version
slot. When the transaction commits, the system sets the new version’s
Begin-ts and End-ts fields and maintains the Next Pointer and Jump
Pointer fields.
Search: To perform a read operation on a tuple, the searching first
traverses the root-to-leaf paths in 𝐵+-tree; once searching reaches a
particular leaf node containing the search key, it executes a linear
version traversal through the next link from there. Then, it searches for
a visible version by comparing the current transaction’s read-timestamp
with the versions’ begin-ts and end-ts fields. Our search algorithm is a
straightforward extension of the standard IMDB tree-index search algo-
rithm with two-fold changes. First, before starting a binary search of the
tree, we prefetch the node blocks in the traversal path. Second, when
executing a linear traversal of tuple versions, we perform prefetching to
fetch multiple version blocks ahead. This approach can help accelerate
the search, scan, and update operations of an IMDB indexing structure.
Moreover, under modern database workloads, these operations occur
frequently.
Range Scan: The basic index-only range scan algorithm consists of a
loop that visits a leaf node on each iteration by rechecking the last value
in the iteration. The value represents the largest key of the previous leaf
node and will allow the traversal to find the next leaf node position in
the scan. By leveraging the query statistics, we add prefetches both at
the startup and inside the loop.
3.5. Cost analysis
In this section, we provide qualitative analysis to show that our
prefetching indexing scheme achieves a better version search perfor-
mance. At the core, version searching resembles a combination of
tree-based and list-based irregular access patterns, firstly traversing
the leaf-to-root paths in binary search trees; once version searching
reaches the version chain HEAD, it performs regular linear traversals
from there. Below, we analyze and model these steps in detail. All
notation is summarized in Table 2.
Tree Index Traversal. For a B +-tree index with fanout b the index
traversal cost, from the root to the first corresponding leaf, is a function
of the number of key/tuplePointer pairs N and is given by:
𝑇 𝐼𝑇 = (1 + ⌈log𝑚𝑤𝑡 𝑁⌉) ⋅ (𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑏 + ( 𝑤𝑡
2 ) ⋅ 𝑇1
) (1)
𝑇 𝐼𝑇𝑝 = (1 + ⌈log𝑚𝑤𝑡 𝑁⌉) ⋅ (𝑇1 + ( 𝑤𝑡
2 − 1) ⋅ 𝑇𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡
) (2)
Eq. (1) assumes that traversing from a node to its child results in a
random memory access, which will be incurred based on the height of
the tree, and that, on average, for each non-leaf node and leaf node,
half of the keys will be read sequentially. In the prefetching indexing
design, before starting binary searching, we perform path prefetching,
and then the node blocks can be cached in the TLB. Assume that each
node has multiple cache lines, the cost of the first cache line is 𝑇1, and
the additional latency of fetching the following cache line in parallel is
𝑇𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡. As shown in Eq. (2), the costs of accessing a node depend on the
cache miss that can be served in parallel in the memory system.
Version Chain Traversal. After reaching the leaf node, the cost of
accessing the indirection arrays is a cache miss and a TLB miss, and
we include them in this model. However, this cost can be reduced in
the prefetching indexing design due to the jump pointer prefetching.
Since the version nodes can be in arbitrary memory locations, each
Table 2
Terminology.
Variable Definition
N data size, key/tuplePoniter pairs in a tree
b tree fanout, b = m×w𝑡
w𝑡 number of cache lines in a tree node
m number of key/pointer pairs in one cache line
n number of versions of a tuple
w𝑣 number of cache lines in a version node
𝑇1 RAM(L1-to-Memory) latency of a cache miss
𝑇𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 latency of an additional pipelined cache miss
𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑏 latency of a data TLB miss
time we need to visit a tuple version, a cache miss and a TLB miss
are incurred. Thus, given that n is the number of versions of a tuple,
and i-th is the required version, the version chain traversal cost for each
version searching is:
𝑉 𝐶𝑇 = 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑏 + 𝑇1 + 𝑛𝑖 ⋅ (𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑏 + ( 𝑤𝑣
2 ) ⋅ 𝑇1
) (3)
𝑉 𝐶𝑇 𝑝 = 𝑛𝑖 ⋅ (𝑇1 + ( 𝑤𝑣
2 − 1) ⋅ 𝑇𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡
) (4)
Putting together Eqs. (1) and (3), the cost of a version searching
using traditional indexing is:
𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑛𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑇 𝐼𝑇 + 𝑉 𝐶𝑇 (5)
Putting together Eqs. (2) and (4), the cost of a version searching using
prefetching indexing becomes:
𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑓 𝑒𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑛𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑇 𝐼𝑇𝑝 + 𝑉 𝐶𝑇 𝑝 (6)
Here, we compare the traditional indexing and the prefetching
indexing for version searching using the above equations. Based on
our experimental setup, the parameters are as follows: 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑏 = 18
cycles, 𝑇1 = 200 cycles, 𝑇𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 8 cycles [43]. For N = 10 mil-
lion tuples database size, m = 64 bytes
16 bytes = 4, we can compute the
optimal w 𝑡 value by minimizing the tree index traversal cost, that
the optimal w 𝑡 would be 4, 6, 8, 10, 12. We consider a version
chain length more than 10 and a tuple version size more than 200
bytes, then w 𝑣 = 200 bytes
64 bytes ≈ 3. According to Eq. (5), in the tradi-
tional indexing design, the overall cost of a version search equals
(1 + 6) × (18 + 4
2 × 200 ) + 18 + 200 + 10 × (18 + 2
2 × 200 ) = 6324cy-
cles. According to Eq. (6), in the prefetching indexing design, the over-
all cost of a version search equals (1 + 6) × (200 + ( 4
2 − 1) × 8 ) + 10 ×
(200 + ( 2
2 − 1) × 8 ) = 3440cycles. Therefore, comparing our scheme
with the state-of-the-art scheme, we see that the prefetching indexing
scheme is at least 6324
3440 ≈ 1.84× better than the traditional design.
Space Overhead. All frequent access paths’ storage space overhead
is (Number Of Blocks In Those Paths)× 8B. In a 16 key fields leaf node,
the space overhead of all the metadata (jump pointers) is 16 × 8B
per 1536B sized block, i.e., 128𝐵
1536𝐵 = 8% . The space overhead of the
jump pointer queue is 8𝐵×𝑛
200𝐵×𝑛 = 0 .04%. However, the space overhead
is relatively small since the garbage collector reclaims all the jump
pointers and versions together.
4. Evaluation
In this section, we compare the prefetching indexing scheme with
the state-of-the-art indexing scheme. We have implemented the
prefetching indexing scheme in DBx1000,2 a popular in-memory DBMS
used to evaluate many IMDB technologies [7]. All transactions are
executed with the default snapshot isolation level. We evaluate the
prefetching indexing scheme on two CPUs: an Intel Coffee Lake CPU [44]
and an Intel Cascade Lake CPU [45] with 28MB L3, as shown in Table 3.
Both servers run 64-bit Ubuntu 20.04 with Linux kernel v5.15.0. We use

--- PAGE 7 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
185
Q. Zhang et al.
Table 3
Parameters of the evaluated machines.
Processor1 Workstation, Intel Xeon E-2224G, 3.5 GHz
Cores Coffee Lake, 2017, 4 cores
L1 Cache Private 32 KB, 8-way, 4 cycles
L2 Cache Private 256 KB, 4-way, 12 cycles
L3 Cache Shared 8 MB, 16-way, 42 cycles
Memory 32 GB, DDR4-2666, 39.74 GB/s, 2 chanels,
RAM latency: 220 cycles
Processor2 Server, Intel Xeon Gold 5218R, 2.1 GHz
Cores Cascade Lake, 2019, 20 cores
L1 Cache Private 32 KB, 8-way, 4 cycles
L2 Cache Private 1024 KB, 16-way, 14 cycles
L3 Cache Shared 28 MB, 11-way, 50 cycles
Memory 96 GB, DDR4-2667, 119.21 GB/s, 6 channels,
RAM latency: 200 cycles [ 46]
Table 4
The number of keys, levels and nodes in trees (non-leaf node size = 512B, leaf node
size = 1536B).
Number of Keys Height Number of Number of
Non-leaf Nodes Leaf Nodes
0.1 M 5 1734 13 029
1 M 6 16 258 131 005
10 M 7 248 760 1 310 653
20 M 7 438 752 2 621 290
Fig. 7. Search performance with various database size on Processor1. (We load a
database with 100 K/1M/10M tuples, then perform key searches in a single thread
under the different prefetching strategies, i.e., Baseline:no prefetching, CP: cache
prefetching, PP: path prefetching, MP: monitor prefetching.)
version 11.1.0 of the gcc compiler with the ‘‘-O3’’ optimization flag. 3
We use the Intel Xeon Gold 5218R as our main evaluation platform.
We used a set of Yahoo! Cloud Serving Benchmark (YCSB) bench-
marks [30]. It contains a single table of tuples with an 8B primary key
and ten columns of random string data, each 10B in size. Thus, each
tuple version is more than 100B size. YCSB uses a Zipfian distribution
to select keys for operations. The workload consists of three operation
types: (1) a search operation that retrieves a single tuple based on
its primary key, (2) an update operation that modifies a single tuple
based on its primary key, and (3) a scan operation that starts from a
random starting offset and then returns at most 30 matching tuples.
The YCSB workload reports each operation type’s latency and number
of operations. If not mentioned otherwise, we use a database with 10
million tuples (∼1 GB).
3 https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Optimize-Options.html
Fig. 8. Search performance with various database size on Processor2. (We load a
database with 1M/10M/20M tuples, then perform key searches in a single thread under
the different prefetching strategies, i.e., Baseline:no prefetching, CP: cache prefetching,
PP: path prefetching, MP: monitor prefetching.)
4.1. Search performance
In the following, we vary the database size, the hardware configu-
ration, the prefetching distance, the node size, the number of threads,
and the key access distribution to show the search performance of the
prefetching indexing scheme under a variety of settings.
Varying the database size. In this set of experiments, we bulk
load a database to have 0.1 million, 1 million, and 10 million tuples.
Then, we perform 10 million search operations uniformly with a single
thread. Table 4 depicts the number of levels and nodes in the tree
structure.
Fig. 7 shows the performance of different prefetching strategies
when running uniform searches on the three databases. The results
are normalized to the baseline with no prefetching. For cold caches,
the speedup of the prefetching indexing over the baseline is between a
factor of 1.08 and 1.50. Likewise, the warm cache speedup is 1.07 to
1.48. We see that indexing with prefetching support performs better
than indexing with no prefetching. We also find that the larger the
database size, the higher the performance gains from prefetching in-
dexing. Another observation worth mentioning is that path prefetching
performs better than other designs. We conclude that the performance
gains stem mainly from the accurate prefetch candidates for future
keys.
Varying the hardware configuration. In the following, we evalu-
ate the workload performance using the processor2 hardware. Fig. 8
shows the performance of 100 million uniform searches after bulk
loading 1 million, 10 million, and 20 million keys into the database.
On the server-grade CPU with a larger cache capacity and higher
memory bandwidth, all three prefetching designs significantly improve
performance. For cold caches, the speedup of the path prefetching over
the baseline is between a factor of 1.18 and 1.53. In particular, the
overall throughput speedups over the baseline are 1.14 for CP, 1.23
for PP, and 1.10 for MP on average. With the larger L3 cache, we can
record much more prefetch candidates.
From the results, we can see that the higher the tree structure, the
larger the search cost; when trees are of the same height, the more non-
leaf nodes yield better performance. For CP and PP, larger L3 allows
the prefetchers to issue more prefetch instructions, resulting in notable
benefits. However, for MP, the more non-leaf nodes may incur more
prefetching overhead for generating optimal prefetch candidates.
Varying the prefetching distance. Fig. 9 shows the tree traversal
and overall throughput of 100 million uniform searches after bulk
loading 10 million tuples into the database. For this experiment, we
increase the L3 cache space occupied by prefetching from 10% to 55%
to vary the number of prefetch candidates. For the different number of

--- PAGE 8 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
186
Q. Zhang et al.
Fig. 9. Search performance with various prefetching distance (MP-55: prefetch candi-
dates occupy 55% of the L3 cache capacity, MP-35: prefetch candidates occupy 35%
of the L3 cache capacity, MP-10: prefetch candidates occupy 10% of the L3 cache
capacity).
Fig. 10. Search performance with various threads.
operations, we see that the speedup of the MP-10 over the baseline
is between a factor of 1.01 and 1.02. The speedup of the MP-55
over the baseline is between a factor of 1.01 and 1.03. The MP-35
achieves better performance (1.08–1.10 speedups over baseline). This
is because the smaller the number of prefetch candidates, the less
performance improvement can be achieved. However, prefetching a
larger number of candidates would pollute the L3 cache, decreasing
the overall throughput performance.
Varying the number of threads.
In this set of experiments, we further evaluate the impact of cache
size on the indexing scheme using read-intensive workloads. Fig. 10
reports the search throughput while increasing the number of threads
from 1 to 10. We bulk load a database with 10 million tuples. Then,
every working thread performs 10 million search operations. We see
that all indexing structures show almost linear performance scaling as
the number of threads from 1 to 10. Overall, since most of the key
accesses are directed to a few data blocks with the Zipfian theta=0.99
skew, we observed that on the significant skew workload, the overall
throughput is higher due to hot caches.
For no skew (Zipfian theta=0.0) key accesses, we see that prefetch-
ing structures improve throughput by up to 20% under 10 threads.
Under the significantly skewed workload, the benefits of prefetching
slightly shrink. Overall, prefetching indexing is robust to skew because
it deeply integrates prefetching into the version search processing.
Varying the node size. Fig. 11 reports search performance while
varying inner node size from 512B to 2048B. Table 5 shows the number
of accessed blocks in each tree level with the different node sizes.
From the figure, we see that MP achieves a relatively stable throughput
performance in all cases of different inner node sizes.
Comparing the different inner node sizes, we see that 512B is
slightly better than the other sizes when combined with our prefetching
scheme. The larger the inner node, the less the search performance
improvement. It is because the larger the inner node, the smaller the
number of levels of the tree, and the higher the search cost within the
node, resulting in more minor benefits of prefetching optimizations.
Overall, 512B is a good choice of inner node size for the prefetching
Table 5
The number of accessed blocks in each tree level when the inner node size changes
(database size = 20 million tuples, tree height = 7/6/5).
Level 512B 1024B 2048B
h-3 69(0.03 MB) 113(0.1 MB) 985(2 MB)
h-4 1003(0.4 MB) 2910(3 MB) 49679(97 MB)
h-5 14107(7 MB) 102671(102 MB) N/A
h-6 204 196 N/A N/A
(99 MB)
Fig. 11. Search performance with various inner node size.
Fig. 12. Search performance with various zifian coefficient.
indexing scheme. CP and PP are more sensitive to inner node size
because the prefetch instructions cost expands during each iteration,
causing longer latency for the search key.
Zipfian key access distribution. Fig. 12 presents the overall
throughput (operations per second) of prefetching indexing on work-
loads with Zipfian distribution. The Zipfian distribution has been
verified in characterizing the content popularity, and the theta is the
Zipf parameter representing the skewness in content popularity. For
lowly skewed access patterns, the speedup of prefetching indexing over
the baseline is 1.20, 1.36, and 1.08 on average, respectively. For highly
skewed access patterns, since most of the key access is direct to a few
inner nodes with the Zipfian distribution, all benefits of prefetching
optimizations decrease.
4.2. Range scan performance
We next examine the performance of prefetching indexing on range
scan operations. We configure the scan predicate’s key range to start
the scan operation from a uniformly random starting offset. We vary
the number of keys to scan per request (i.e., the size of the range).
From Fig. 13, we observe that when scanning only 10 or 20 keys,
CP and PP prefetching designs are faster than MP. However, when
scanning far fewer than 30 keys, the cost of our prefetching scheme
becomes noticeable. When the request returns at most 30 tuples, there
are at least three different leaf nodes on the traversal path. Generally
speaking, these leaf nodes have common inner nodes. It may introduce
duplicate prefetching instructions, causing wasted space and CPU cy-
cles. On the other hand, when scanning more leaf nodes, the key issue
is reducing the search cost within the leaf nodes instead of the access
paths. For example, by just only prefetching ahead these leaf nodes
(i.e., LP: leaf node prefetching), we see a speedup of 1.14 over the
baseline in this case.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
187
Q. Zhang et al.
Fig. 13. Search performance with various number of keys in a scan operation (database
size=10 million tuples, 1 million number of transactions, 10 operations per transaction).
Fig. 14. Search performance with various version chain length. (database size=1
million tuples, 10 working threads, each thread performing 0.01 million transactions,
100 operations per transaction (50% searches/50% updates).).
Fig. 15. Search performance with different prefetching designs (Baseline:no prefetch-
ing, CP: cache prefetching, PP: path prefetching, MP: monitor prefetching, CP+JMP:
cache prefetching combined with jump pointer prefetching, PP+JMP: path prefetching
combined with jump pointer prefetching, MP+JMP: monitor prefetching combined with
jump pointer prefetching).
4.3. Update performance
In addition to improving search and scan performance, one of
our goals is to achieve good performance on update operations. In
Table 6
The Zipfian theta and the average chain length accessed (length = 𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑠
𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑂𝑓 𝑆𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ𝐾𝑒𝑦𝑠 ).
theta 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.99
length 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 6
this experiment, we use the update-intensive workload (YCSB-A: 50%
searches, 50% updates). We vary the Zipfian distribution of the keys
searched to test the version chain traversal performance. The Zipfian
coefficient and the average chain length accessed are shown in Table 6.
Generally, increasing the length of the chains means that trans-
actions take longer to execute, thereby increasing the likelihood that
a transaction will conflict with another one. We set all transactions
executing with the default snapshot isolation level. Read uses a trans-
action’s identifier to search for a visible version of a tuple by traversing
the version chain.
As shown in Fig. 14 , under low contention (theta=0.2), the jump
pointer prefetching can achieve 1.75 × better performance over the
normal scheme because it reduces the impact of significant misses. This
phenomenon is also evident with tests under the highest contention
level (theta=0.99), where the average chain length is 6, and jump
pointer prefetching achieves 1.58 × better performance.
4.4. Prefetching performance
Finally, our last set of experiments presents an overall prefetching
performance study. A central claim of this paper is that the demon-
strated speedups for prefetching indexing are obtained by effectively
limiting the exposed miss latency of previous approaches. In this exper-
iment, we confirm that claim and show the contribution of both aspects
of our prefetching indexing design to overall performance.
In the first experiment, we bulk load 1 million tuples and then run
10 work threads, each one performing 0.01 million transactions. There
are 100 operations per transaction mixture comprising 50% searches
and 50% updates. These operations access tuples following the Zipfian
theta=0.2 distribution. As shown in Fig. 15(a), for the overall through-
put performance, we can see that the prefetching indexing scheme
(path prefetcher combined with jump pointer prefetcher) can achieve
1.76× speedups compared with the baseline (without any prefetching
optimization).
In the second experiment, we bulk load 10 million tuples and
then run 10 work threads, each one performing 0.1 million transac-
tions. There are 10 operations per transaction mixture comprising 50%
searches and 50% updates. These operations access tuples following the
Zipfian theta=0.0 distribution. As shown in Fig. 15(b) , for the overall
throughput performance, we can see that the prefetching indexing
scheme (path prefetcher combined with jump pointer prefetcher) can
achieve 1.65 × speedups compared with the baseline (without any
prefetching optimization).
5. Related work
IMDBs Indexing Scheme. Several works from industry [ 3,19,47,
48] and academia [2,4–7] propose designs for IMDBs indexing schemes.
All of these proposals suffer from the pointer chasing we highlight
in Section 2 , and none can fully exploit memory system parallelism
in today’s processors, which results in a high cost of memory ac-
cess. Our prefetching indexing scheme exploits prefetching techniques,
i.e., path prefetcher and jump pointer prefetcher, for enhancing CPU
cache performance for in-memory MVCC index searches.
Prefetching for Pointer-Based Data Structure. Many data ana-
lytic and machine learning kernels in data center workloads operate
on massive, memory-resident, pointer-based data structures (i.e., lists,
trees, and graphs). Various mechanisms have been proposed to prefetch
data in pointer-based data structures to hide the cache miss latencies.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
188
Q. Zhang et al.
These approaches are hardware-based [27], software-based [24,26,
28,49] or combined software-hardware [23,25,29] mechanisms. This
paper focuses on only the software-based in-memory MVCC indexing
accelerating strategy. The software approach offers excellent flexibility
that can be applied to any hardware platform. One strength of our
scheme is its generic applicability in that one can apply prefetching
indexing to any MVCC indexing storage.
Version Search Structure. While multi-version is the most com-
mon design in modern database systems, it has inherent problems in
read-update workloads. If there are many updates in the presence of
long-running queries, the length of version chains grows quickly. IMDB
engines have faced such a challenge long before and have overcome
it through finer-grained garbage collection [50]. Recently, work [51]
proposes vWEAVER, which incrementally constructs a logical version
search structure over the physical version store and allows a scan to
traverse new version search structures for fast lookup. In this work,
we design a cooperative prefetching model, i.e., path prefetcher and
jump pointer prefetcher, to accelerate pointer-chasing operations over
multi-versioned data.
6. Discussion and future work
Memory Wall is still a bottleneck in enhancing the performance
of computer systems now. How to reduce Memory Access Latency is
a problem that we have to deal with. Assuming that minimizing the
memory access latency problem is NP-complete, pursuing optimal query
performance is a long journey for in-memory database systems. While
integrating path prefetcher and jump pointer prefetcher into the pop-
ular in-memory database storage engine, we faced difficult decisions.
This section summarizes them as lessons one should carefully consider
when adopting our designs in others’ codebases.
• Worst-case space complexity. Generally, we expect better search
performance, comparable or better update performance, and lower
space overhead. The prefetcher has two inevitable factors fueling
memory space expansion: a series of access block addresses
and jump pointers. We quantify the extra space overhead in
the DBx1000 storage engine (detailed in Section 3.5). In fact,
besides the more extensive data set, frequent update operations
incur much more significant overhead. In the worst case, the
space overhead could increase linearly. However, this approach is
attractive concerning space overhead because of the low overall
space overhead. The overhead of jump pointers should be insignif-
icant because the engine’s garbage collection (GC) component
will reclaim expired versions periodically. It ensures that the
version chain’s length is reasonable at any point.
• To prefetch, or not to prefetch. This paper focuses on leveraging
the software prefetching technique to accelerate version searches.
In addition to prefetch instruction overhead, there are further
threefold limits to the benefit of our prefetch approaches. (1) A
small table, for instance, does not have much advantage from
prefetching because most of the data is in the caches of the CPU.
Thus, we are unable to hide any latency. With increasingly grow-
ing table sizes, we hit the point where even the L3 cache (the last
level cache in our experiments) is exhausted. We achieve the high-
est performance gain. (2) Since the L3 cache resource is limited,
our current approach seems inefficient when one search touches
a very long access path that exceeds the threshold, e.g., L3 cache
size. Pipelined prefetching, paralleled prefetching, and grouping
prefetching are worth the effort. (3) When to issue the prefetch
instructions significantly impacts the prefetching performance.
It is worth revisiting the query optimization with new version
search methods to achieve a significant synergy effect.
• Hardware/software prefetcher. Some database operations (e.g.,
range queries, loop iteration, and hash joins) are computationally
intensive, and hardware-based or hardware/software-cooperative
prefetchers are required for good performance. However, depend-
ing on application types, workload differs amongst database func-
tionalities. Thus, resources can be wasted or improperly allocated
if the database system does not have fine-grained elasticity. More-
over, these prefetchers need help to detect more complex data
structures, and they cannot perform software-specific optimiza-
tions (e.g., prefetching for future iterations of nearest neighbors
instead of direct successors).
• Learning-based prefetching indexing scheme. While using an in-
memory histogram to track the workload patterns is significantly
efficient in our design, it seems unintelligent. Assuming that a
prefetcher learns different access paths and predicts the workload
patterns, it could predictively adapt its prefetch candidates. First,
it predicts that an area of data will be accessed in the future; it
treats that area as prefetch candidates soon before access occurs.
Second, it predicts resource contention and accesses’ character-
istics to enable automatic change in the prefetching strategies
(e.g., pipelined or paralleled).
• Searching unstructured data. According to recent research, un-
structured data, such as text, images, and video, took up about
80% of the 40,000 exabytes of new data generated in 2020, and
their percentage keeps rising due to the increasing amount of
human-generated rich media [52,53]. With the development of
learning-based embedding models, embedding vectors are widely
used for analyzing and searching unstructured data. The vectors
are also continuously updated when new user/content comes,
user behavior changes or the embedding model is updated. To
provide fast online data ingestion, the vector database systems
would append updates in parallel (e.g., multi-version concurrency
control). Without an efficient version search method, query pro-
cessing conducts searches using brute-force scans so that updates
can be searched quickly. There are three challenges to integrating
our designs (i.e., target two-dimensional database tables) into
these systems: high-dimensional vector space, complex search
semantics, and vector search costs.
7. Conclusion
We present a novelty version search structure that we call a prefetch-
ing indexing scheme. This scheme targets any in-memory MVCC sys-
tem; its append-based update behavior benefits the lower write amplifi-
cation and the higher parallelism but causes massive read amplification
for mixed workloads. The prefetching indexing scheme combines a path
prefetcher with a jump pointer prefetcher to accelerate the searches
for the most recently updated tuples. In other words, this scheme
explores how prefetching could hide the data cache miss latencies of
searching visible versions of the given transactions. We evaluate the
scheme on YCSB using synthetic datasets and workloads. On YCSB, it
outperforms the traditional indexing scheme by 1.1×−1 .5× under read-
only workloads and by up to 1.7 × under mixed workloads. We have
open-sourced prefetching indexing scheme 2.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Qian Zhang: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodol-
ogy, Project administration, Software, Supervision, Visualization, Writ-
ing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Haoyun Song: For-
mal analysis, Investigation, Validation. Kaiyan Zhou: Resources, Soft-
ware. Jianhao Wei: Data curation, Software. Chuqiao Xiao: Project
administration, Supervision.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
189
Q. Zhang et al.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] Stephen Tu, Wenting Zheng, Eddie Kohler, Barbara Liskov, Samuel Madden,
Speedy transactions in multicore in-memory databases, in: Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2013, pp.
18–32.
[2] Wenting Zheng, Stephen Tu, Eddie Kohler, Barbara Liskov, Fast databases with
fast durability and recovery through multicore parallelism, in: 11th {USENIX}
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 14), 2014,
pp. 465–477.
[3] Cristian Diaconu, Craig Freedman, Erik Ismert, Per-Ake Larson, Pravin Mittal,
Ryan Stonecipher, Nitin Verma, Mike Zwilling, Hekaton: SQL server’s memory-
optimized OLTP engine, in: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, 2013, pp. 1243–1254.
[4] Alfons Kemper, Thomas Neumann, HyPer: A hybrid OLTP&OLAP main memory
database system based on virtual memory snapshots, in: 2011 IEEE 27th
International Conference on Data Engineering, IEEE, 2011, pp. 195–206.
[5] Joy Arulraj, Andrew Pavlo, Prashanth Menon, Bridging the archipelago between
row-stores and column-stores for hybrid workloads, in: Proceedings of the 2016
International Conference on Management of Data, 2016, pp. 583–598.
[6] Viktor Leis, Michael Haubenschild, Alfons Kemper, Thomas Neumann, LeanStore:
In-memory data management beyond main memory, in: 2018 IEEE 34th
International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE, IEEE, 2018, pp. 185–196.
[7] Xiangyao Yu, George Bezerra, Andrew Pavlo, Srinivas Devadas, Michael Stone-
braker, Staring into the Abyss: An Evaluation of Concurrency Control with One
Thousand Cores, Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2014.
[8] Kangnyeon Kim, Tianzheng Wang, Ryan Johnson, Ippokratis Pandis, Ermia: Fast
memory-optimized database system for heterogeneous workloads, in: Proceedings
of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data, 2016, pp.
1675–1687.
[9] Hyeontaek Lim, Michael Kaminsky, David G. Andersen, Cicada: Dependably
fast multi-core in-memory transactions, in: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
International Conference on Management of Data, 2017, pp. 21–35.
[10] Yingjun Wu, Joy Arulraj, Jiexi Lin, Ran Xian, Andrew Pavlo, An empirical
evaluation of in-memory multi-version concurrency control, Proc. VLDB Endow.
10 (7) (2017) 781–792.
[11] Cisco Global Cloud Index, Forecast and methodology, 2016–2021 white paper,
2018, Updated: February 1.
[12] Shaosheng Cao, XinXing Yang, Cen Chen, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, Yuan Qi, Titant:
Online real-time transaction fraud detection in ant financial, 2019, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.07407.
[13] Xiafei Qiu, Wubin Cen, Zhengping Qian, You Peng, Ying Zhang, Xuemin Lin,
Jingren Zhou, Real-time constrained cycle detection in large dynamic graphs,
Proc. VLDB Endow. 11 (12) (2018) 1876–1888.
[14] Van-Dai Ta, Chuan-Ming Liu, Goodwill Wandile Nkabinde, Big data stream com-
puting in healthcare real-time analytics, in: 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analysis, ICCCBDA, IEEE, 2016, pp. 37–42.
[15] Ronald Barber, Christian Garcia-Arellano, Ronen Grosman, Guy Lohman, C.
Mohan, Rene Muller, Hamid Pirahesh, Vijayshankar Raman, Richard Sidle, Adam
Storm, et al., Wiser: A highly available HTAP dbms for iot applications, in: 2019
IEEE International Conference on Big Data, Big Data, IEEE, 2019, pp. 268–277.
[16] Anuruddha Thennakoon, Chee Bhagyani, Sasitha Premadasa, Shalitha Mihiranga,
Nuwan Kuruwitaarachchi, Real-time credit card fraud detection using machine
learning, in: 2019 9th International Conference on Cloud Computing, Data
Science & Engineering, Confluence, IEEE, 2019, pp. 488–493.
[17] Per-Åke Larson, Adrian Birka, Eric N. Hanson, Weiyun Huang, Michal
Nowakiewicz, Vassilis Papadimos, Real-time analytical processing with SQL
server, Proc. VLDB Endow. 8 (12) (2015) 1740–1751.
[18] Ms P.R.S.M. Lakshmi, Ms K. SanthiSri, Mr N. Veeranjaneyulu, A study on real-
time business intelligence and big data, in: Information Engineering, vol. 4,
Science and Engineering Publishing Company, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[19] Franz Färber, Norman May, Wolfgang Lehner, Philipp Große, Ingo Müller,
Hannes Rauhe, Jonathan Dees, The SAP HANA database–an architecture
overview, IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 35 (1) (2012) 28–33.
[20] Tirthankar Lahiri, Shasank Chavan, Maria Colgan, Dinesh Das, Amit Ganesh,
Mike Gleeson, Sanket Hase, Allison Holloway, Jesse Kamp, Teck-Hua Lee, et al.,
Oracle database in-memory: A dual format in-memory database, in: 2015 IEEE
31st International Conference on Data Engineering, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1253–1258.
[21] Chi-Keung Luk, Todd C. Mowry, Compiler-based prefetching for recursive data
structures, in: Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Archi-
tectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, 1996, pp.
222–233.
[22] Chi-Keung Luk, Todd C. Mowry, Automatic compiler-inserted prefetching for
pointer-based applications, IEEE Trans. Comput. 48 (2) (1999) 134–141.
[23] Gabriel Weisz, Joseph Melber, Yu Wang, Kermin Fleming, Eriko Nurvitadhi,
James C. Hoe, A study of pointer-chasing performance on shared-memory
processor-FPGA systems, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM/SIGDA International
Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, 2016, pp. 264–273.
[24] Onur Kocberber, Babak Falsafi, Boris Grot, Asynchronous memory access
chaining, Proc. VLDB Endow. 9 (4) (2015) 252–263.
[25] Mustafa Cavus, Resit Sendag, Joshua J. Yi, Informed prefetching for indirect
memory accesses, ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim. (TACO) 17 (1) (2020) 1–29.
[26] Ricardo Alves, Stefanos Kaxiras, David Black-Schaffer, Early address prediction:
Efficient pipeline prefetch and reuse, ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim. (TACO)
18 (3) (2021) 1–22.
[27] Hikaru Takayashiki, Masayuki Sato, Kazuhiko Komatsu, Hiroaki Kobayashi,
A hardware prefetching mechanism for vector gather instructions, in:
2019 IEEE/ACM 9th Workshop on Irregular Applications: Architectures and
Algorithms, IA3, IEEE, 2019, pp. 59–66.
[28] Sam Ainsworth, Timothy M. Jones, Software prefetching for indirect memory
accesses: A microarchitectural perspective, ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. (TOCS) 36
(3) (2019) 1–34.
[29] Kevin Hsieh, Samira Khan, Nandita Vijaykumar, Kevin K Chang, Amirali
Boroumand, Saugata Ghose, Onur Mutlu, Accelerating pointer chasing in 3D-
stacked memory: Challenges, mechanisms, evaluation, in: 2016 IEEE 34th
International Conference on Computer Design, ICCD, IEEE, 2016, pp. 25–32.
[30] Brian F. Cooper, Adam Silberstein, Erwin Tam, Raghu Ramakrishnan, Russell
Sears, Benchmarking cloud serving systems with YCSB, in: Proceedings of the
1st ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, 2010, pp. 143–154.
[31] Thomas Neumann, Tobias Mühlbauer, Alfons Kemper, Fast serializable multi-
version concurrency control for main-memory database systems, in: Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data,
2015, pp. 677–689.
[32] Yu Xia, Xiangyao Yu, Andrew Pavlo, Srinivas Devadas, Taurus: Lightweight Par-
allel Logging for In-Memory Database Management Systems, VLDB Endowment,
2020.
[33] Takayuki Tanabe, Takashi Hoshino, Hideyuki Kawashima, Jun Nemoto, Masahiro
Tanaka, Osamu Tatebe, An analysis of concurrency control protocols for in-
memory databases with CCBench (extended version), 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2009.11558.
[34] Amir Roth, Gurindar S. Sohi, Effective jump-pointer prefetching for linked data
structures, in: Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, 1999, pp. 111–121.
[35] Shimin Chen, Redesigning Database Systems in Light of CPU Cache Prefetching
(Ph.D. thesis), Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2005.
[36] Arlino Magalhaes, Jose Maria Monteiro, Angelo Brayner, Main memory database
recovery: A survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (2) (2021) 1–36.
[37] Christie L. Alappat, Johannes Hofmann, Georg Hager, Holger Fehske, Alan R.
Bishop, Gerhard Wellein, Understanding HPC benchmark performance on intel
broadwell and cascade lake processors, in: High Performance Computing: 35th
International Conference, ISC High Performance 2020, Frankfurt/Main, Germany,
June 22–25, 2020, Proceedings 35, Springer, 2020, pp. 412–433.
[38] Miles Dai, Reverse Engineering the Intel Cascade Lake MeshInterconnect (Ph.D.
thesis), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2021.
[39] Shuo Li, Zhiguang Chen, Nong Xiao, Guangyu Sun, Path prefetching: Accelerating
index searches for in-memory databases, in: 2018 IEEE 36th International
Conference on Computer Design, ICCD, IEEE, 2018, pp. 274–277.
[40] Anastassia Ailamaki, David J. DeWitt, Mark D. Hill, Data page layouts for
relational databases on deep memory hierarchies, VLDB J. 11 (2002) 198–215.
[41] Richard A. Hankins, Jignesh M. Patel, Data morphing: An adaptive, cache-
conscious storage technique, in: Proceedings 2003 VLDB Conference, Elsevier,
2003, pp. 417–428.
[42] Shimin Chen, Phillip B. Gibbons, Todd C. Mowry, Improving index performance
through prefetching, ACM SIGMOD Rec. 30 (2) (2001) 235–246.
[43] SkyLake. https://www.7-cpu.com/cpu/Skylake.html.
[44] CoffeeLake, 2017, https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures/coffee_
lake.
[45] CascadeLake, 2019, https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures/
cascade_lake.
[46] Intel memory latency checker v3.10, 2021, https://www.intel.com/content/
www/us/en/developer/articles/tool/intelr-memory-latency-checker.html.
[47] Martin Grund, Philippe Cudré-Mauroux, Jens Krüger, Samuel Madden, Hasso
Plattner, An overview of HYRISE-a main memory hybrid storage engine, IEEE
Data Eng. Bull. 35 (1) (2012) 52–57.
[48] Adam Prout, Szu-Po Wang, Joseph Victor, Zhou Sun, Yongzhu Li, Jack Chen,
Evan Bergeron, Eric Hanson, Robert Walzer, Rodrigo Gomes, et al., Cloud-
native transactions and analytics in SingleStore, in: Proceedings of the 2022
International Conference on Management of Data, 2022, pp. 2340–2352.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 179–190
190
Q. Zhang et al.
[49] Ji-Tae Yun, Su-Kyung Yoon, Jeong-Geun Kim, Shin-Dug Kim, Access pattern-
based high-performance main memory system for graph processing on single
machines, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 108 (2020) 560–573.
[50] Jan Böttcher, Viktor Leis, Thomas Neumann, Alfons Kemper, Scalable garbage
collection for in-memory MVCC systems, Proc. VLDB Endow. 13 (2) (2019)
128–141.
[51] Jongbin Kim, Kihwang Kim, Hyunsoo Cho, Jaeseon Yu, Sooyong Kang, Hyungsoo
Jung, Rethink the scan in MVCC databases, in: Proceedings of the 2021
International Conference on Management of Data, 2021, pp. 938–950.
[52] Rentong Guo, Xiaofan Luan, Long Xiang, Xiao Yan, Xiaomeng Yi, Jigao Luo,
Qianya Cheng, Weizhi Xu, Jiarui Luo, Frank Liu, et al., Manu: a cloud native
vector database management system, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13843 .
[53] Timothy King. 2019, 80 Percent of your data will be unstructured in five
years, 2019, https://solutionsreview.com/data-management/80-percent-of-your-
data-will-be-unstructured-in-five-years/ .
Qian Zhang received a B.S. and M.S. degrees in Computer
Science and Information Engineering from HeNan Univer-
sity, China, in 2012 and 2014. She is currently pursuing
a PH.D. degree in the Software Engineering Institute at
East China Normal University, China. From 2014 to 2018,
she was a software development engineer with the finan-
cial technology company of Hundsun, headquartered in
Hangzhou, China. Her research interests include in-memory
database systems, distributed database systems, computer
systems, data structure, memory access optimization, and
machine learning with databases.
Haoyun Song received a B.S. degree from Sichuan Uni-
versity in 2022. She is currently pursuing an M.S. degree
from the Software Engineering Institute, East China Nor-
mal University, China and an M.BA. degree from the
University of Haifa, Israel. Her research interests include
distributed databases, in-memory database systems, and
query optimization techniques.
Kaiyan Zhou received a Bachelor’s degree from Sichuan
University and is currently studying at East China Nor-
mal University. His current research focuses on in-memory
databases and distributed database systems. He is particu-
larly interested in issues within the database kernel domain
and has a substantial reserve of relevant knowledge.
Jianhao Wei received an M.S. degree from the Software
Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, China,
where he is currently pursuing a PH.D. degree. He has
published one journal paper in the Journal of Software. His
main research interests include multi-Query sharing tech-
nology, in-memory database systems, persistent hardware,
query optimization techniques, and machine learning with
databases.
Chuqiao Xiao received a B.S. degree from the Tianjin
Polytechnic University of computer science and technology
in 2015 and an M.S degree in computer technology from
East China Normal University in 2018, where he is currently
pursuing a Ph.D.degree in the software engineering institute.
Her research interests include distributed databases, key–
value storage systems, in-memory database systems, and
erasure codes.
