=== PAPER: P19-Saikkonen2016
=== FILENAME: Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees.pdf
=== PAGES: 20

--- PAGE 1 ---
c⃝ The British Computer Society 2015. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxv090
Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout
for Dynamic Binary Trees
Riku Saikkonen∗ and Eljas Soisalon-Soininen
Department of Computer Science, School of Science, Aalto University,
PO Box 15400, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
∗Corresponding author: riku.saikkonen@alumni.aalto.ﬁ
We use cache-sensitive memory layouts to improve search performance in ordinary binary search
trees, without increasing the time complexity of insertion or deletion. Our approach does not require
changes to the structure of the nodes or the rebalancing strategy of the tree. Cache-sensitivity is main-
tained with a memory-layout invariant that keeps a given number of neighboring nodes in the tree
stored in the same cache block. We show how to preserve it using worst-case constant-time operations
executed when the tree changes. In our extensive experiments, the invariant consistently improved the
search performance of large AV Land red–black trees by 26–32%, on synthetic data as well as real-
istic search tree operations extracted from a database benchmark. We also compare binary search
trees with several cache-sensitive B-trees, and non-dynamic approaches for laying out tree nodes in
a multi-level memory hierarchy.
Keywords: binary search trees; cache-conscious data structures; experiments
Received 20 November 2014; revised 23 August 2015
Handling editor: Rajeev Raman
1. INTRODUCTION
Almost all current computers have a hierarchical memory sys-
tem, where a number of hardware caches are placed between
the processor and the main memory. Caches are small but fast
memories that provide faster access to recently used memory
locations. Caching has become an important factor in the prac-
tical performance of main-memory data structures. Its relative
importance will likely continue to increase [1,2], especially
since many applications that previously needed to read data
from disk can now ﬁt all of the necessary data in the main
memory. In data-intensive main-memory applications, reading
from main memory is often a bottleneck similar to disk I /Of o r
external-memory algorithms.
There are two types of cache-centric algorithms. We focus
on the cache-sensitive (also called cache-conscious or cache-
aware) model, where the implementation knows the speciﬁc
parameters of the caches that are in use and adapts itself to them.
In contrast, cache-oblivious algorithms attempt to optimize
themselves to an unknown memory hierarchy.
For search trees, the most important cache parameters are the
cache block sizes, i.e. the granularities at which data are stored
in the caches and transferred between levels of the memory hier-
archy. The primary goal is to enhance search performance by
reducing the number of separate cache blocks visited on a search
path [3–5].
In this article, we show how to preserve a cache-sensitive
memory layout in the presence of insertions and deletions to
binary search trees. No general results of this kind have been
presented thus far: most cache-centric search trees are variants
of the B-tree, and the scarce research on the effect of caches on
binary trees consists of methods for rearranging all nodes of
a ﬁxed tree into a good memory layout. While the adjustable
node size makes B-tree-like structures more suitable for cache
memories, we feel that it is also useful to improve binary
search trees, since they are very commonly used in real-world
software. One recent use of binary search trees is in database
systems that employ copy-on-write semantics: binary trees are
optimal for copying root-to-leaf paths in update operations [6].
This is why, for instance, Bernstein et al. [7] used (non-cache-
optimized) binary search trees as the main index structure of
their Hyder prototype database, despite their mention of poor
processor cache performance as a disadvantage.
Constraints that we set upon ourselves were not to increase
the time complexity of insertion or deletion (more than a con-
stant factor), and to preserve both the structure of the tree
nodes and the rebalancing algorithm intact. This makes our
Advance Access publication on 4 November 2015
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 2 ---
solution apply to any binary search tree that uses rotations for
balancing: the usual A VL and red–black trees as well as many
others, for example rank-balanced trees [8] (a recent binary
search tree that combines some of the best properties of A VL
(Adelson-V elsky and Landis) and red–black trees) and more
special-purpose structures like stratiﬁed trees [9] (designed to
optimize bulk operations). In contrast, most other research on
cache-sensitive or cache-oblivious search trees only works with
one speciﬁc kind of tree or even dictates its own cache-centric
rebalancing algorithm for the tree. (We discuss related work in
detail below.)
Our solution is based on a simple memory-layout invariant:
in its simplest form, we require a non-leaf node to be located
on the same cache block as either its parent or its child. We
re-establish the invariant in constant time whenever the tree
changes in insertion or deletion or when a rotation is performed.
Even this simple invariant increases search performance sig-
niﬁcantly, but we also discuss an extension that keeps a subtree
containing at least α> 2 connected nodes on the same cache
block, where α is a user-selectable parameter. We show that
the simple invariant can reduce the number of separate cache
blocks traversed by a search by 33%, or up to 50% with α> 2.
Another contribution of the present article is in our extensive
experimentation, especially (to our knowledge) the ﬁrst study of
cache-sensitive search trees using real-world inputs, taken from
the well-known TPC-C database benchmark [10]. We compare
our solution to standard A VL and red–black trees, and to a non-
dynamic multi-level layout that is not preserved in insertions or
deletions. Moreover, we include several B-trees in our experi-
ments: ordinary B
+-trees with cache-block-sized nodes (which
are already quite efﬁcient [3]) and the cache-sensitive B+-trees
of Rao and Ross [1]. We used synthetic (random) input oper-
ations as well as operation sequences from the TPC-C bench-
mark, which we acquired by instrumenting MySQL to produce
a trace of its search-tree operations.
With regard to our approach for preserving a cache-sensitive
memory layout in insertions and deletions, the main result of
our experiments is that it consistently improved search time
by 26–32% in red–black and A VL trees having ∼10
7 keys.
This was true on four different computers, and on both ran-
dom searches and the non-random access pattern of the TPC-C
benchmark. It is also consistent with our theoretical analysis
(the 33% referred to above).
On random searches, we found the non-dynamic multi-level
layout to improve the search time of red–black and A VL trees by
51–56%, as well as improving B
+-trees with cache-block-sized
nodes by 19–34% and cache-sensitive B +-trees by 1–12%.
Searches extracted from TPC-C exhibited closely similar
(slightly smaller) improvements. We consider the 26–32%
improvement produced by our dynamic approach to be quite
good when compared to the 51–56% of the much more complex
and non-dynamic layout.
A disadvantage of our approach is that it increases inser-
tion and deletion times, though only by a constant factor. Here
experimental results varied in the computers we tried, but
generally preserving the invariant made random insertions
∼50% slower to twice as slow, while deletions were only
slightly slower, sometimes even faster (the invariant speeds up
searching for the affected node). The TPC-C operations have
∼9% insertions, making our dynamic approach considerably
less helpful than with only searches: we got at best 9% improve-
ment (compared with 26–30% for only searches). However,
our prototype implementation was not optimized for insertion
and deletion times.
This article is organized as follows. We deﬁne our cache
model in Section 2. Section 3 gives the (parameterized) invari-
ant that our dynamic single-level algorithm preserves, analyzes
its effect on tree searches and presents the algorithm that pre-
serves this invariant. We describe our experiments in Section 4,
giving the results in Section 5. Section 6 discusses related
work, Section 7 compares binary search trees with B-trees and
Section 8 concludes the article.
2. CACHE MODEL
The memory architecture of a typical modern computer consists
of several levels of fast but relatively small cache memories
before the slower and larger main memory. Data are transferred
between consecutive levels of the memory hierarchy in cache
blocks, which have a ﬁxed size at every level.
Figure 1 gives an example of a hypothetical memory hierar-
chy with two levels of cache memories using 64- and 256-byte
cache blocks. When a word of 4 bytes is read from memory and
is not present in either of the caches, the 256-byte cache block
containing the word is ﬁrst copied from the main memory into
the larger cache. Then the 64-byte cache block containing the
word is copied from the larger cache to the smaller one, and
ﬁnally the 4 bytes are read into a CPU register from the smaller
cache.
In addition to the data caches, the mapping of virtual
addresses to physical addresses used by multi-tasking operat-
ing systems employs another kind of cache: the Translation
Lookaside Buffer or Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) cache.
Although the TLB does not work quite like the other caches, the
algorithmic effect is similar: it is faster to fetch two nodes from
the same TLB block than from two separate blocks. Therefore,
we can model the TLB as an additional level of cache in the
hierarchy. The block size of the TLB cache is usually the page
size of the computer (e.g. 4096 bytes), although larger blocks
are sometimes also used.
In this article, we model the cache hierarchy as follows. There
are k levels of cache, with block sizes B
1 < B2 < ··· < Bk
(measured in bytes) at each level. In addition, we deﬁne B0 to
be the node size of the tree that is to be laid out in the cache,
in bytes, and B
k+1 =∞ . All nodes are assumed to have the
same size. We assume that our algorithms know these cache
parameters—in practice, they can be inferred by measuring
the time taken by selected memory accesses, or from the CPU
631Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 3 ---
FIGURE 1. Reading a 4-byte word in a hypothetical memory hierarchy.
model or metadata stored in the CPU. Note that our model
does not include cache sizes (only block sizes), since the algo-
rithms that we consider do not have a use for them (the other
cache-sensitive search trees discussed in Section 1 do not use
cache sizes either). This also allows us to merge levels when
they have the same block size, which is common, as hardware
caches often use the same block size on several levels.
A concrete example of the cache hierarchy is given by one of
the computers used for our experiments (Section 4). Its AMD
Athlon XP processor has two levels of data caches: a 64 KB
level 1 (‘L1’) cache and a 512 KB level 2 (‘L2’) cache. How-
ever, both caches have 64-byte blocks, so they only use one
level in the hierarchy of the cache model. The TLB cache uses
4096-byte pages (a small number of 2 and 4 MB TLB blocks
also exist in the TLB of this processor, but these were not used
in the experiments). The parameters of the full hierarchy used
in the experiments are thus:
k = 2
B
0 = 16 (the binary trees have 16-byte nodes)
B1 = 64 (the block size of the L1 and L2 caches)
B2 = 4096 (the page size of the TLB cache)
B3 =∞ .
Our algorithms assume that, for i > 1, each block size Bi
is an integer multiple of Bi−1 ; this is always true in actual
hardware caches, since the values of Bi with i ≥ 1 are powers
of 2. Additionally, if B1 is not an integer multiple of the node
size B0, a node should not cross a B1-block boundary, so that it
is never necessary to fetch two cache blocks from memory in
order to access a single node. To achieve this, the allocation of
new nodes needs to be modiﬁed so that the last (B1 mod B0)
bytes of each B1-block are not used. The memory locations of
cache-block boundaries are easy to infer from the block sizes:
a memory address A points to the ﬁrst byte of a level i cache
block when (A mod B
i) = 01.
The main efﬁciency measure that we use to analyze search
trees is the Bi-block search path length.
1 For virtual addresses this assumes that the page size is an integer multiple
of all cache block sizes, which is true since they are all powers of 2 and no larger
than the page size.
Deﬁnition 2.1. The Bi-block search path length, denoted as
Pi,0 ≤ i ≤ k, is the length of a root-to-leaf path in a tree, mea-
sured in the number of separate cache blocks of size Bi encoun-
tered on the path.
Thus, P0 is the traditional search path length in nodes (assum-
ing that the search ends at a leaf), P1 is the number of separate
B1-sized cache blocks encountered on the path, and so on. Tra-
ditional balanced search trees attempt to minimize P0 (of a ran-
dom search, i.e. averaged over all root-to-leaf paths); note that
Pi−1 ≥ Pi, since each Bi−1 -block is completely contained in a
single Bi-block.
3. LOCAL RELOCATION
In this section, we discuss our modiﬁcations to the insert and
delete algorithms that preserve a good memory layout with-
out increasing the time complexity of insertion and deletion.
Since we do not change the structure of the nodes, our approach
only changes the locations of the nodes in memory—in other
words, the memory layout of the tree. We name our approach
local relocation, since the layout changes are localized to a few
nodes around each structure modiﬁcation.
3.1. The invariant
The memory-layout property that we will preserve is that each
node in the tree has some neighboring nodes accompanying it
on the same cache block. Speciﬁcally, we require that at least α
(a tunable parameter) nodes are placed on the same cache block,
such that they form a connected subgraph of the tree: that is, the
block may contain any subsetS of at leastαnodes from treeT,a s
long as the path from any s
1 ∈ S to any s2 ∈ S uses only nodes
that are in S. To make preserving the invariant easier, we relax
our condition so that any connected subgraph containing a leaf
node is valid: subgraphs containing leaves have a proportionally
small effect on the root-to-leaf paths of large trees.
Stated formally, we preserve the following memory-layout
invariant.
Invariant 3.1. Each non-leaf nodex of the search treeT is part
of a connected subgraph of T that is stored in a single B
1-sized
cache block, and contains either at least α non-leaf nodes or at
least one leaf node.
632 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 4 ---
This invariant only considers one level in the cache hier-
archy. We concentrate on laying out small nodes in small
(B1-sized) cache blocks; however, the technique also works
with larger node and cache-block sizes, e.g. 64-byte nodes
placed in 4096-byte TLB pages.
For a given ratio B1/B0, there is an upper limit for the possi-
ble values of α. Obviously α ≤ B1/B0 (α nodes must ﬁt in the
cache block). However, our update algorithm given below fur-
ther restricts this to α ≤ (2 + B1/B0)/3. (Thus in the particular
architecture and node size used as an example aboveB1/B0 = 4,
so α must be 2.)
Before giving the update algorithm, we examine the quality
of this memory layout. Recall from Section 2 that we measure
quality using the average B1-block path length, averaged over
all root-to-leaf paths in the tree. We show that, even in the worst
case, Invariant 3.1 improves this path length by a factor that
depends on α, when compared with a worst-case tree without
any layout invariant.
To keep the result independent of the balancing strategy of the
underlying tree, we analyze complete trees, i.e. ones where all
root-to-leaf paths have the same length. To see that Invariant3.1
improves the memory layout of, e.g. a red–black tree, recall that
the top part of a red–black tree of height h is a complete tree of
height at least h/2 (in practice often close to h).
Theorem 3.1. Assume that a complete binary tree T of
height h ≫ α has been laid out in memory so that Invariant 3.1
is satisﬁed. Then the expected value of the B
1-block path length
of a random search in T is
E[P1] ≤ 2α−1
2α − 1 h + 1
2 .
Proof sketch. In a speciﬁc memory layout, E[P1] is counted
over all root-to-leaf paths in the tree. Thus, an upper bound
for E[P
1] can be derived from a worst-case memory layout,
in which each B1-sized cache block contains only the nodes
prescribed by Invariant 3.1, and in a worst-case arrangement.
Consider all possible arrangements allowed by Invariant 3.1,
i.e. the possible shapes of connected subgraphs of T with
α elements.
Clearly, the largestB
1-block path length is reached when each
connected subgraph is a single chain of parent–child links, as
in Fig. 2, so that no node has both of its children in its cache
block. More formally, the worst-case layout we will examine is
as follows: The root node r of T begins a chain C of α parent–
child links (i.e. a path down from r to a node on level α). Any
child of the nodes in C that is not in C starts a new chain in the
same way, and each cache block used to store the tree contains
(only) exactly one of these chains.
To calculate the B
1-block path length, consider all possible
paths down from a node p that starts a new chain Cp. Assume
without loss of generality thatCp contains the left child ofp.O n e
half of all the paths from p descend left from p to the next node
in Cp, while the other half (paths that descend to p’s right child)
lead to the topmost node q of a new chain Cq, which is located
on a separate cache block. In a complete binary tree, if p has
height h, the height of q is h − 1. Similarly, 1
4 of the paths down
from p lead to the third node in C (if α> 2), and the remaining
1
4 lead to a new chain at the root of a subtree with height h − 2.
Let P(h) denote the expectedB1-block path length in a subtree
of height h rooted at the topmost node of a chain. In general,
P(h) obeys the recurrence
P(h) =
⎧
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪⎪⎩
(h + 1)/2f or h <α ,
1 +
[
α∑
i=1
1
2i P(h − i)
]
+ 1
2α P(h − α) otherwise.
The base case is found by examining a tree of height h <α
and its worst-case layout into cache blocks: similar to the above,
except that the chains of parent–child links can simply end at any
leaf node (i.e. take only the topmost h levels of Fig. 2).
An induction proof shows that P(h) ≤ 1
2 + h · 2α−1 /
(2α − 1) is a solution to this recurrence. Thus, E[P1| any mem-
ory layout satisfying Invariant 3.1] ≤ E[P1| this worst-case
memory layout] = P(h) ≤ 1
2 + h · 2α−1 /(2α − 1).
FIGURE 2. A worst-case arrangement of nodes that satisﬁes Invariant 3.1, here with α = 3. The left–right order of the children (subtrees) is not
essential: the layout could be made less regular by exchanging the children of any of the nodes. Any other change to this layout that preserves the
invariant would necessarily move both children of some node p onto the same cache block with p, which would improve the memory layout of the
subtree rooted at p without affecting the layout elsewhere in the tree.
633Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 5 ---
Examining speciﬁc values of α, Theorem 3.1 gives E[P1] ≤
1
2 + 2h/3f o rα = 2 (i.e. at least 33% improvement to the worst-
case memory layout that does not satisfy Invariant 3.1),E[P1] ≤
1
2 + 4h/7f o r α = 3 (42% improvement), E[P1] ≤ 1
2 + 8h/15
for α = 4 (46% improvement). These values approach 1
2 + h/2
in the limit (when α →∞ ), with rapidly decreasing improve-
ment for larger values of α. This analysis points to small values
of α being preferable, and even α = 2 giving a 33% improve-
ment over not using the invariant at all.
Why is h/2 the limit? Invariant 3.1 allows a connected sub-
graph of any shape to be placed in a cache block. It is thus possi-
ble, even with large α, to have a layout with every right child of
every node located on a separate cache block from its parent, as
in Fig. 2. This leads to at most 50% improvement over the worst-
case non-cache-sensitive tree, which has each node on its own
cache block.
To get further than h/2, the memory-layout invariant would
additionally have to dictate the shapes of the connected sub-
graphs, e.g. by limiting their height to O(log α). However, this
would make preserving the invariant more complex to imple-
ment, as well as requiring the modiﬁcation of a larger set of
nodes to preserve the invariant after an insertion or deletion,
which would increase the time complexity.
3.2. Preserving the invariant
We will call a node x broken if Invariant 3.1 does not hold for it.
To analyze how this can happen, denoteN(x) = the set ofneigh-
bors of node x, i.e. the parent ofx and both of its children (if they
exist). Furthermore, say that x depends on y if moving (only) y
to another cache block would make x broken.
Assume that the invariant initially holds in a binary search
tree T. After any structure modiﬁcation operation (actual inser-
tion, actual deletion or rotation) is done in T, some of its nodes
can potentially be broken. To re-establish the invariant, the algo-
rithm given in the next section is executed after every rotation
and after nodes are inserted or deleted. The algorithm is given
a list of nodes (e.g. 1–6 nodes for α = 2) that could potentially
have been broken by the (single) structure modiﬁcation.
Forα = 2, the nodes that can break in a structure modiﬁcation
are exactly those whose parent or either child changes, since a
node will break if it depends on a node that is moved away or
deleted.
Figure 3 shows all the cases where nodes can break. In exter-
nal or leaf-oriented trees, insertion (a) always inserts a new leaf
node y and its new parent x in place of a leaf node q, while dele-
tion (b) deletes a leaf node y and its parent x. In both cases, the
parent p of x may break, since its child changes. In (a), x itself
may be initially broken (if it is not allocated in the same cache
block as y); in (b), the remaining sibling nodeq of y (if any) may
break, since its parent changes.
When inserting to an internal tree (c), the parent of the newly
inserted node may break if it was previously a leaf. Deletion in
internal trees has two cases. If a leaf is deleted (d), its parent
(a)
(b)
(c) (d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
FIGURE 3. Broken nodes in actual insertion, actual deletion and
rotations, for α = 2. Potentially broken nodes are ﬁlled black; the
dotted lines indicate the nodes that the operation works on. ( a)E x t e r -
nal tree insertion, (b) External tree deletion, ( c) Internal tree insertion,
(d) Internal tree deletion (leaf), ( e) Internal tree deletion (non-leaf),
(f) Single rotation and ( g) Double rotation.
may break (unless it becomes a leaf). Otherwise (e), deletion
of an internal node i is done by searching down the tree for the
‘follower’ node f with the next-larger key (or equivalently the
634 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 6 ---
next-smaller key), and replacing 2 the key and data ﬁelds of i
with those of f . Node f with a parent g always has at most one
child (call it h), so f can now be detached from the tree by set-
ting the child pointer in g to point to h. Then both g and h may
break, since f is no longer the child of g nor the parent of h.
Rotations (f) and (g) rotate the two or three nodes indicated
by the dotted line in Fig. 3f and g into a different shape. Here,
the parent p of the topmost rotated node may break, since its
child changes. In addition, the children of the rotated nodes may
break, except for the leftmost and rightmost children, whose par-
ents do not change. Finally, the rotated nodes themselves may
break, because their parents and children change.
When α> 2, the same nodes can break as when α = 2; call
this initial set of potentially broken nodes R0. In addition, some
other nodes on the cache blocks that contain nodes in R0 can
break; they are found as follows. For each potentially broken
node r ∈ R
0, we ﬁnd the neighbors of r that are on the same
cache block as r. For each r, we continue this search until we
have found at least α nodes, or any leaf, or all the remain-
ing neighbors are on different cache blocks. If we have found
α nodes or a leaf, then r is not broken. On the other hand, if less
than α nodes and no leaves were found, then all of these nodes
(i.e. a connected subgraph of the tree that contains node r and
at most α − 2 other nodes, all on the same cache block) are
broken.
In summary, we have the following theorem.
Theorem 3.2. One structure modiﬁcation can cause
O(α) nodes to be broken. They can be found in time O(α).
Proof. By the above discussion, there are at most six broken
nodes in the case α = 2 (the black nodes in Fig. 3). When
α> 2, each of the six nodes in the initial set R
0 can produce
α − 2 additional broken nodes in the worst case, for a total
of 6α − 6. (These additional broken nodes account for, e.g.
the case where a chain of α connected nodes gets discon-
nected in the middle. A smaller constant factor could be shown
for instance by noting that node z in Fig. 3g cannot produce
additional broken nodes.)
3.3. Fixing broken nodes for α = 2
We now describe how to ﬁx broken nodes, starting with the case
α = 2. Here we use an additional deﬁnition: D(x) is deﬁned to
be the subset of the neighbors of node x that depend on node x
(i.e. will be broken if x is moved to another cache block). Algo-
rithm 1 uses the property that a broken node r can be moved
freely, because D(r) =∅ : all of its neighbors N(r) are on differ-
ent cache blocks, as otherwise r would not be broken.
Each iteration in Algorithm 1 ﬁrst removes any non-broken
nodes from the set R of potentially broken nodes (initially R
0).
2 A common alternate implementation adjusts child pointers to swap f and i,
and then deletes f . However, this is obviously worse from a memory layout
perspective, as conﬁrmed experimentally by Oksanen and Malmi [ 11].
Then the ﬁrst available one of three options is executed, and
these two steps are repeated until R becomes empty.
The ﬁrst option of the three examines the cache blocks of all
neighbors of the broken nodes to ﬁnd a neighbor x with free
space in its cache block. If such a neighbor is found, a broken
node r ∈ N(x) is ﬁxed by moving it to this cache block. If no
such neighbor exists, the second option is to examine the cache
blocks of the nodes in R: if one of them has enough space for a
neighbor x and all of its dependants D(x), they are all moved to
this cache block.
Otherwise, the third option is to forcibly ﬁx a broken node r
by moving it and some neighboring nodes to a newly allocated
cache block. At least one neighbor of r needs to be moved along
with r to make r non-broken; but if a neighbor x was not broken,
some of its other neighbors may depend on x staying where it
is—these are exactly the nodes inD(x), and they are all moved to
the new cache block. It is safe to move the nodes inD(x) together
with x: since they depend on x, none of their other neighbors are
on the same cache block.
Theorem 3.3. Algorithm 1 moves at most 4|R|=O(|R|)
nodes in memory. The total time complexity of the algorithm is
O(|R|
2).
Proof. Each iteration of the loop in Algorithm 1 ﬁxes at least
one broken node. Line 5 does this by moving one node; line 11
moves 2–4 nodes (r, x, and at most two other neighbors ofx), and
line 8 moves 1–3 nodes. There are at most|R| iterations, and thus
at most 4|R| nodes are moved.
Each iteration looks at O(|R|) nodes, making the total time
complexity O(|R|
2), assuming that the amount of free space
in a cache block can be found in constant time. However, a
naïve implementation ﬁnds free space by looking at every
node in the B
1-block to locate free positions for nodes. This
increases the time complexity to O(|R|2 ·⌊ B1/B0⌋), but may
actually be preferable with the small B1 of current proces-
sors. The implementation described in Section 4 did this, with
B1/B0 = 4.
With larger B1/B0, the bound of the theorem is reached by
keeping track of the number of free positions for nodes in an
integer stored in a ﬁxed location inside the B1-sized block.3 To
ﬁnd a free node in constant time, a doubly linked list of free
nodes can be stored in the otherwise unused free nodes them-
selves [11], with a pointer to the head of this list stored in a
ﬁxed location inside the B
1-block.
3.4. Fixing broken nodes for α> 2
The main difference in ﬁxing broken nodes whenα> 2i si nt h e
handling of dependants: when α = 2 and a non-broken node x
is moved to another cache block, the only nodes that need to be
3 A few bits are enough to store this: log 2⌊B1/B0⌋ must be much smaller
than, e.g. the size of a single child pointer.
635Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 7 ---
ALGORITHM 1 The local relocation algorithm for α = 2.
ﬁx-broken(R):
1 while R ̸=∅ do
2 Remove any non-broken nodes from R, and exit if R becomes empty.
3 if a node in N(R) has free space in its cache block then
4 Select such a node x and a broken neighbor r ∈ R. Prefer the x with the most free space and an r with no broken neighbors.
5 Move r to the cache block containing x.
6 else if a node r ∈ R has enough free space in its cache block then
7 Select the neighbor x ∈ N(r) with the smallest |D(x)|.
8 Move x and all nodes in D(x) to the cache block containing r.
9 else
10 Select a node x ∈ N(R) and its broken neighbor r ∈ R. Prefer a broken x, and after that an x with small |D(x)|. If there are multiple choices
for r, prefer one with N(r) \{ x} non-broken.
11 Move r, x and all nodes in D(x) to a newly allocated cache block.
Note: R is a set of potentially broken nodes which the algorithm will make non-broken; N(R) = ⋃
r∈R N(r),w h e r eN(r) is the set of neighbors of
node r. An implementation detail is that the algorithm needs access to the parent, grandparent and great grandparent of each node in R, since the
grandparent may have to be moved in lines 8 and 11. The search-tree algorithms can temporarily store the (partial) list of parents together with each
node that they process; the list is initialized while descending down in the tree and needs to be updated in rotations, each of which changes the parents
in a particular way. The changes occur close to the current nodes, so the parent-list updates are O(1) per rotation.
moved with it are some of its neighbors (i.e. the setD(x) deﬁned
above).
When α> 2, the need to move neighboring non-broken
nodes together may propagate beyond the immediate neigh-
bors. If a non-broken nodex needs to be moved to another cache
block (to ﬁx a broken neighbor of x that is also moved), each
non-broken neighbor y of x that is on the same cache block as x
may need to be moved as well (since it may depend on x stay-
ing where it is, as with α = 2). In addition, each y can require
at most α − 2 other nodes to be moved along with it: these are
connected to y using only nodes in the same cache block as
both x and y. The maximum is α − 2, since if y has α − 1 other
connected nodes on its cache block, then y does not depend
on x.
Algorithm 2 ﬁxes broken nodes by ﬁrst selecting from the
set of broken nodes a connected subset of 1 to α broken nodes
(line 2). Neighboring non-broken nodes are then added to this
set (lines 3–10) to make it large enough to be moved to its own
cache block (i.e. until it contains either α nodes or a leaf). If
there is free space in one of the existing cache blocks containing
the nodes involved, the set is moved there (line 13); otherwise,
a new cache block is allocated (line 18). This process ﬁxes the
broken nodes that were selected and never breaks any; it is
repeated until all nodes have been ﬁxed.
Adding neighboring nodes to the selected set U (lines 3–10)
can be done as follows. First, we select an arbitrary neighbor v
of a node u in U and add v to U (lines 4–5; on the ﬁrst iteration,
v is always non-broken). However, if v is non-broken, some
of its neighbors could break if v was moved to another cache
block. We resolve this by including all such nodes in U as well
(lines 7–10)—they are found by looking at the other neighbors
of v that are on the same cache block as v. For each such neigh-
bor w, we search, staying on the cache block that contains v,
for a connected subgraph that contains any leaves or α nodes
(including w but excluding v). If a large enough subgraph is
found, moving v will not break w and we are done; otherwise,
we include the subgraph that we found in U (line 10).
After U is moved, all nodes in U are non-broken. In addition,
moving nodes to an existing cache block can also ﬁx some other
nodes that are in this block. We remove these fromR if necessary
(lines 14–16).
Theorem 3.4. Algorithm 2 moves at most O (α|R|) nodes
in memory. The total time complexity of the algorithm is
O(max{α2|R|, α|R|2}).
Proof. On each iteration of the outermost loop, U initially
(after line 2) contains 1 to α broken nodes—in the worst case
only one. Lines 3–10 are executed until U has α nodes (or any
leaves). Lines 5–10 add 1 to 1 + 2(α − 1) nodes to U (since
|N(v) \{ u}| < 3 and, on line 10, |W| <α ). Thus, the largest
|U| is reached when |U|= α − 1 at line 3, and then U can
ﬁnally contain at most 3 α − 2 nodes, only one of which is
broken in the worst case. Therefore, in the worst case 3 α− 2
nodes are moved to ﬁx one broken node, and a total of at most
|R|· (3α − 2) = O(α|R|) nodes are moved to ﬁx all nodes in R.
(This worst case is behind the restriction α ≤ (2 + B1/B0)/3
mentioned in Section 3.1: 3α − 2 nodes must ﬁt in a cache
block for line 18.)
Line 2 uses O(α) time. Lines 3–10 use O(α2) time, since
lines 6–10 can use O(α) time without adding any nodes
to U (the time is used to check that v can be moved with-
out its neighbors). Lines 12–18 use O(|U|) = O(α|R|) time
if the amount of free space in a cache block can be found
in constant time. Since each iteration of the outer loop
could ﬁx only one broken node, the total time complexity
is O(|R| max{α2,α|R|}) = O(max{α2|R|, α|R|2}).
636 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 8 ---
ALGORITHM 2 The local relocation algorithm for α> 2.
ﬁx-broken-larger-alpha(R):
1 while R ̸=∅ do
2 U ← an arbitrarily selected connected subgraph containing only nodes from R, as large as possible with |U|≤α
3 while |U| <α and U does not contain leaves do
4 (u, v) ← an arbitrary pair of neighboring nodes with u ∈ U and v ̸∈ U
5 U ← U ∪ v
6 if v ̸∈ R then
7 for w ∈ Cv ∩ N(v) \{ u} do
8 W ← a connected subset of Cv \{ v} that contains w, as large as possible with |W|≤ α
9 if |W| <α and W contains no leaves then {w would break }
10 U ← U ∪ W
11 R ← R \ U
12 if a node x ∈ U has space in Cx for all nodes in U then
13 Move all nodes in U to Cx. Prefer the node x with the most free space in Cx.
14 for r ∈ R ∩ Cx do
15 if r is now non-broken then
16 R ← R \{ r}
17 else
18 Move all nodes in U to a newly allocated cache block.
Note: Here the argument R is the initial set of actually broken nodes, as described at the end of Section 3.2. Cx is (the set of nodes in) the cache block
containing node x. An implementation detail left out for clarity is that the algorithm needs to keep track of a linked list of parents for each node that
it uses.
Finding free space in the cache blocks can be done in the same
way as in Theorem 3.3.
Since visiting an uncached memory area is the most costly
operation in a cache-sensitive algorithm, we should also look at
the number of cache blocks that the algorithms need to trans-
fer from memory. Here, the algorithms are optimal (disregard-
ing constant factors and assuming that the cache can hold all the
required blocks).
Theorem 3.5. Algorithms 1 and 2 v i s i ta tm o s tO(|R|) sepa-
rate cache blocks.
Proof. Both algorithms only look at the cache blocks of bro-
ken nodes and their immediate neighbors. In addition, one new
cache block can be allocated per broken node.
The previous complexity results were presented in terms of
|R|, the number of broken nodes given to Algorithm 1 or 2.
Since |R|=O(α) (Theorem 3.2), we can now summarize from
the above theorems.
Theorem 3.6. After a single structure modiﬁcation, Algo-
rithms 1 and 2 can be used to re-establish Invariant 3.1 in time
O(α3). The algorithms move O(α 2) nodes in memory, visiting
O(α) separate cache blocks.
Recall that α is a tunable parameter, and small values of α are
preferable—so all of these are O(1) for ﬁxed α.
3.5. Additional optimizations
Though it is not required for Invariant 3.1, the memory layout
can be optimized somewhat further with a simple heuristic: in
insertion, a new node should be allocated in the cache block of
its parent if it happens to have enough free space.
For α = 2 in an internal A VL tree, broken nodes can be ﬁxed
in a simpler way in the special case where a leaf node is deleted
(Fig. 3d). If the leaf noden and its parent p are on the same cache
block, and the other child of p (call it n
′) is on a different cache
block, then move n′ to the location where n was deleted from
( i na nA V Lt r e e ,n′ must be a leaf). Otherwise—if p and n are on
different cache blocks, or if n′ does not exist or is on the same
cache block as n—nothing needs to be done.
3.6. Space usage
Local relocation includes a space–time tradeoff: it sometimes
allocates a new cache block to get α nodes on the same cache
block (thus improving cache locality), even though existing
cache blocks would have space for the nodes. Since the algo-
rithms always prefer unused locations in a previously allocated
cache block, it is to be hoped that the cache blocks do not
become very empty on average. We examine the space usage
empirically in Section 5.
Instead of moving nodes to a new cache block, it would in
some cases be possible to re-establish the invariant by rearrang-
ing all nodes on the existing cache blocks that are under consid-
eration. However, moving unrelated nodes on the existing cache
blocks ‘out of the way’ of the currently broken nodes is not prac-
tical: moving a node x in memory needs access to its parent to
637Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 9 ---
TABLE 1. CPU and cache parameters of the four computers used in the experiments. The Atom computer has one physical CPU core but uses
hyper-threading to provide two logical cores. All four had the same block size, 64 bytes, in both the levels 1 and 2 data caches, and a TLB page
size of 4096 bytes.
CPU model Cores Speed (MHz) Level 1 data cache Level 2 data cache
AMD Athlon XP 1 2167 64 KB, 2-way set-assoc. 512 KB, 16-way set-assoc.
AMD Sempron 3000+ 1 1800 64 KB, 2-way set-assoc. 128 KB, 16-way set-assoc.
Intel Atom N270 1 + HT 1600 24 KB, 6-way set-assoc. 512 KB, 8-way set-assoc.
Intel Core2 Quad 4 2660 32 KB, 8-way set-assoc. 3 MB, 12-way set-assoc.
update the link that points tox. But there is no simple way to ﬁnd
the parent, unless the nodes contain parent links, which we do
not want to require because of their overhead.
A lower limit for the cache block ﬁll ratio can be obtained
from the property that local relocation preserves: each cache
block contains either a leaf node or at least α non-leaf nodes.
Empty cache blocks should of course be reused by new
allocations.
3.7. Fixing broken nodes less frequently
In theory, it would be possible to execute local relocation less
frequently than was done above. For instance, Algorithm 1 or 2
could be run after a full sequence of rotations after an insertion or
deletion, and not after each individual rotation. In this way fewer
nodes might need to be moved, since a larger number of bro-
ken nodes gives more freedom in how to re-establish the invari-
ant. Also, ﬁxing broken nodes after individual rotations has the
disadvantage that the very next rotation may break some of the
nodes that were just carefully ﬁxed.
However, Algorithms 1 and 2 take time proportional to the
square of the number of broken nodes (Theorems 3.3 and 3.4).
This approach would thus increase the total worst-case time
complexity of insertion and deletion, which we wanted to
avoid.
4. EXPERIMENT SETUP
For our experiments, we implemented the algorithms of
Section 3 on internal A VL and red–black trees, with α = 2a s
discussed in Section 3.1. We include traditional non-cache-
sensitive A VL and red–black trees for comparison. We also
compared the binary search trees with cache-sensitive B
+-trees
(speciﬁcally our reimplementation of the ‘full CSB +-tree’
of [1]) and to standard B +-trees with cache-block-sized
(B1-sized) nodes—the latter is called a ‘cB +-tree’ below.
Since no cache-sensitive methods other than our own are
known for dynamic A VL and red–black trees, we compare
our method with a static approach that rearranges all nodes
into a good cache-sensitive memory layout without regard for
preserving this layout in insertions and deletions. Several cache-
sensitive tree layout algorithms exist in the literature [4,11,12];
our own, called global relocation [13,14], is more speciﬁcally
designed for balanced search trees and includes some useful
optimizations. It is multi-level, here laying out nodes into opti-
mal B
1-sized blocks, which are laid out in B2-sized blocks. We
also apply this global relocation algorithm to the B-trees.
As an additional reference for comparison, we include a
static cache-oblivious layout: with the block sizes ﬁxed to
Bi = (22i
− 1) · B0 (1 ≤ i ≤ 4 is enough for our trees), global
relocation produces a layout that is very close to the van Emde
Boas layout used in cache-oblivious search trees [13,14]. While
not a dynamic algorithm, this gives us a rough idea of how
a cache-oblivious binary search tree (that does not alter the
structure of the nodes) would function.
4.1. Details
We ran the experiments on four computers, whose CPU and
cache parameters are given in Table1. As was noted in Section2,
the cache parameters were as follows:k = 2, B
0 = 16, B1 = 64,
B2 = 4096, B3 =∞ . All the computers happened to have the
same cache block sizes. Each individual experiment was
repeated 15 times; all values given here are averages of these.
4
In addition to search, insertion and deletion times, we also
measured the average search path lengths in nodes, B1-blocks
and B2-blocks (all four computers gave the same values, since
the block sizes were the same). These were counted by exam-
ining all possible paths of successful searches in the tree—i.e.
in the internal trees we included search paths that end before
the leaf level. For internal trees, this gives slightly smaller
path lengths than Deﬁnition 2.1 (which considers only paths
that end at leaves), but we use this value in our experimen-
tal results, since it more closely measures the actual number
of cache blocks visited by a successful search, and makes
comparisons between internal and leaf-oriented trees more
accurate. We name the values P
′
1 and P′
2 to distinguish them
from Deﬁnition 2.1.
4 All implementations were written in C, compiled as 32-bit code using the
GNU C compiler (version 4.1.1 on AthlonXP , 4.4.5 on the others), and ran under
the Linux kernel (version 2.6.18 on AthlonXP , 2.6.32 on the others). The TPC-C
experiments used newer versions (GCC 4.7.2 and Linux 3.2.54). Cache param-
eters were found using Dave Jones’s x86info program.
638 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 10 ---
The binary tree node size B0 = 16 bytes was reached by
using 4-byte integer keys, 4-byte data ﬁelds and 4-byte point-
ers to the left and right children. The A VL tree balance and
red–black tree color information was encoded in the otherwise
unused low-order bits of the child pointers. To save space, we
did not use parent links in any of the tree implementations—
rebalancing was done using an auxiliary stack. Only one of our
test computers was 64-bit, so we used 32-bit pointers in all our
experiments to make the results comparable.
To control the cache-sensitive placement of nodes and to
avoid the space and time overhead of the standard malloc
function, we always allocated our (ﬁxed-size) nodes from a
large array using a simple custom allocator. The large array
was aligned to the largest cache block size B
2.
The nodes of the B-trees were structured as simple sorted
arrays of keys and child pointers (key and data ﬁelds in leaves,
all 4-byte). The branching factor of a non-leaf node (with size
B
1 = 64 bytes) was 7 in the cB+-tree and 14 in the CSB+-tree.
4.2. Using the TPC-C database benchmark
In addition to experiments on synthetic operations, we used
more realistic operation sequences extracted from the well-
known TPC-C database benchmark [10]. The benchmark
models a real-world use case of large search trees (although
normally disk-based ones) in databases, which we think makes
it good for evaluating general-purpose search trees in a heavy-
duty application. Further realism is added by gathering the
operations from a real database management system. The oper-
ations interleave sequential and random reads and writes in
speciﬁc parts of the full key range with some more complex
access patterns.
The operation sequences were extracted as follows. We
instrumented the InnoDB storage engine of MySQL version
5.5 to create a trace of its B-tree operations (InnoDB uses
B-trees for all indexes), and ran a TPC-C benchmark.
5 The
benchmark ﬁrst bulk-loads the initial contents of the tables
using consecutive insertions, after which it executes randomly
selected relatively short transactions. The latter are divided
into a brief ‘rampup’ period (used for warming up buffers etc.)
and a so-called ‘steady-state’; the results we give are from this
steady-state.
The benchmark uses a single parameter for scaling up: the
number of simulated warehouses. We used values ranging from
4 to 25, giving trees with 2.5 to 15 million keys.
We wanted to use each tree as a dense index, i.e. non-key
data are to be stored outside of the tree (simulating the situation
that leaf nodes contain pointers to these data, although we did
not actually store the non-key data). We needed to post-process
the produced trace of operations as follows: (i) MySQL uses
5 Speciﬁcally, OSDL DBT-2 from http://osdldbt.sourceforge.net/, which is
an open-source implementation of the TPC-C benchmark.
delete-marks, which we converted to actual deletion opera-
tions, and buffers some secondary-index modiﬁcations brieﬂy
in an ‘insert buffer’—we instrumented the operations before
this buffering. (ii) MySQL does most of its operations using
cursors, which we avoided (for instance, by converting a search
followed by a deletion of the key at the cursor to a single
key-based deletion). (iii) We converted row-update operations
that do not affect the key value to searches (because non-key
updates do not modify a dense index). Thus our ﬁnal operation
traces consist only of searches, insertions and deletions. (iv)
We condensed complex multi-part keys into a single 32-bit
integer—this allows directly comparing the results with our
other experiments. The equality and order of all keys were
preserved, so the logical structure of the tree was not affected.
(v) We used a single tree to store all 11 indexes (9 primary
and 2 secondary), by preﬁxing each key with the ID of the
index. (Although some database management systems use this
approach, MySQL uses the more common method of having
a separate tree for each index.) We also ignored operations
on the (extremely small) system tables MySQL uses to store
metadata.
In addition to using the TPC-C benchmark operations as is,
we made two modiﬁcations, shown separately in our results. The
unmodiﬁed benchmark constructs most of the search tree using
consecutive insertions in the initial setup phase. For B-trees, this
is the worst case in terms of space usage (even worse for CSB-
trees, as we will see). Real-world B-tree implementations often
include an ad hoc ﬁx for consecutive insertions;
6 to avoid this
complication, we shufﬂed the initial insertions produced by the
benchmark into random order (all permutations equally likely).
Other operations, including all of the steady-state phase whose
time we measure, were not changed. The steady-state phase of
the benchmark includes small bursts of consecutive insertions,
but small enough that they should not affect the results.
In addition, we wished to measure the efﬁciency of search
operations using a realistic distribution of keys. To this end, we
changed all (non-initial) operations in the TPC-C benchmark
to searches, and show these results separately.
5. RESULTS FROM EXPERIMENTS
Since the purpose of cache-sensitive memory layouts is to
improve search performance, we begin this section with our
synthetic experiments on searches. Then we discuss insertions
and deletions, and how they affect future searches. Finally, we
show results from the realistic operation mix of the TPC-C
experiments.
6 For instance, the B-tree in MySQL’s InnoDB splits a node before it is full
when it detects consecutive insertions, and sets the split position very unevenly,
so that the half where future consecutive insertions would go is almost empty.
639Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 11 ---
5.1. Search time, path length and space usage
For the experiments reported in Fig. 4 and Table 2, the tree was
ﬁrst initialized by inserting the keys 1, ... , n in a random order
(with each permutation equally likely) using single insertions.
Then the cache was ‘warmed up’ with 10
4 successful searches of
random keys (uniformly distributed in the range [1, n]). Finally,
we measured the time taken by 10 5 searches, again of random
keys that were present in the tree.
The same sets of operations were performed on different
kinds of search trees with and without the relocation algorithms.
Results are shown in Fig. 4 and Table 2; the table gives numbers
for the rightmost data point in the ﬁgures (n = 10
7). The A VL
trees are not shown in the ﬁgures, since they performed almost
identically to red–black trees, as is seen in Table 2.
It can be seen from Table 2 and the ﬁgures that local relocation
improved search times in red–black and A VL trees by 26–32%
on all four computers when the trees had n = 10
7 keys. With
smaller trees, search times were improved less, but even with
n = 10
5 there was still clear improvement over the non-cache-
optimized trees. For instance, local relocation improved search
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
FIGURE 4. Search times using different trees and layout algorithms. The ﬁgures give the search time relative to the traditional red–black tree, on
four computers. The trees marked ‘global’ have been relocated using the global algorithm, and ‘red–black local’ uses local relocation; the others
use neither global nor local relocation. ( a) AthlonXP computer; ( b) Sempron computer; (c) Atom computer; (d) Core2 computer.
640 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 12 ---
TABLE 2. Search times, average path lengths and memory used by the tree for various trees and relocation algorithms, all with n = 107 keys.
Search time (nanoseconds per search) Avg. path length Size
AthlonXP Sempron Atom Core2 Nodes P′
1 P′
2 MB
Traditional red–black 2327 100% 1543 100% 2246 100% 1089 100% 22.8 22.6 18.1 153
Red–black local 1572 68% 1110 72% 1648 73% 801 73% 22.8 13.7 12.8 176
Red–black global cache-obl. 1220 52% 779 50% 1136 51% 564 52% 22.8 11.9 6.2 216
Red–black global 1017 44% 677 44% 1046 47% 538 49% 22.8 10.6 3.4 173
Traditional A VL 2314 100% 1537 100% 2270 100% 1087 100% 22.7 22.5 18.0 153
A VL local 1568 68% 1113 72% 1650 73% 800 74% 22.7 13.7 12.4 177
A VL global cache-obl. 1214 52% 776 50% 1132 50% 562 52% 22.7 11.9 6.2 216
A VL global 1014 44% 675 44% 1042 46% 536 49% 22.7 10.5 3.4 174
Plain cB+ 1067 100% 895 100% 1222 100% 604 100% 9.0 9.0 8.5 149
cB+ global 869 81% 587 66% 925 76% 430 71% 9.0 9.0 3.0 192
Plain CSB+ 888 100% 731 100% 969 100% 444 100% 7.1 7.1 7.0 206
CSB+ global 836 94% 645 88% 890 92% 439 99% 7.1 7.1 5.1 206
The trees marked ‘global’ have been relocated using the global algorithm, and the ones marked ‘local’ use local relocation; the others use neither.
The search times are also given in percentages relative to the traditional algorithms.
time by 22–33% for 10 6 ≤ n ≤ 107, and even for n = 105 10–
11% on Core2 and 16–25% on the other computers. 7
The static global relocation algorithm improved search times
in the binary trees by 51–56%, so that the improved search
times were close to the plain cB +-tree, somewhat better for
large trees. The ‘cache-oblivious’ layout produced by global
relocation was somewhat worse than the corresponding cache-
sensitive layout, but a lot faster than a non-cache-optimized
tree (dependent on n and the computer used, but 48–50%
improvement for n = 10
7 in Table 2).
The percentage improvements are more or less in line with
the changes in the B1-block path length (P ′
1 in Table 2), which
for n = 107 became 39% smaller with local relocation and 53%
with global relocation. (This relation is more clearly visible in
Fig. 6, to be presented in Section 5.3.) The path lengths also
support the result of Theorem 3.1, which predicted that local
relocation would improve the worst-case layout by at least
33%; note that building the traditional binary search trees by
random insertions produces a layout that is nearly worst-case,
as Table 2 shows (P
′
1 is close to the path length in nodes).
The ﬁgures and Table 2 show that global relocation also
improved search time in the B-trees. As can be seen in the
ﬁgures, the four computers gave somewhat varying improve-
ments for the B-trees; combining the values from all four in
Table 2, cB
+-trees were improved by 19–34% and CSB+-trees
by 1–12% with n = 107.
Table 2 also gives the amount of memory occupied by the
various trees (in megabytes or 2 20 bytes) after the n = 107
insertions and possible relocation. In the binary trees, local
7 A tree with only n = 105 16-byte nodes—1.5 MB without relocation,
1.8 MB when using local relocation—ﬁts completely in the 3 MB L2 cache on
the Core2 computer but not in the others.
relocation increased memory usage by 15–16% and global
relocation by 10–18% (for all tree sizes from 10 5 to 107 keys).
5.2. Insertion and deletion time
We also examined how using local relocation affects the run-
ning times of insertion and deletion. In these experiments, the
tree was ﬁrst initialized with n random insertions, and then
10
4 + 105 random insertions or deletions were performed (on
uniformly distributed locations in the tree). The times given
are averaged from the 105 updates (the 104 were used to ‘warm
up’ the cache). Results are given in Fig. 5.
On the AthlonXP computer shown in Fig. 5a and e, using
local relocation increased insertion times by 8–46% for
106 ≤ n ≤ 107. Deletions were affected less: local relocation
made deletions ∼15% faster to 5% slower for 10 6 ≤ n ≤ 107.
The Core2 computer had similar values (10–50%; 11% faster
to 9% slower), but, for some reason, the other two computers
were less efﬁcient: in Sempron, insertions 35–95% slower and
deletions 0–32% slower; in Atom, insertions 48–115% slower
and deletions 4–43% slower.
Deletions were faster than insertions even without local relo-
cation, but especially when it was used. This may be explained
by the fact that random deletions from binary search trees pro-
duce fewer rotations than random insertions (see, e.g. [15]),
so local relocation needs to examine fewer potentially broken
nodes. Although local relocation takes time, it also decreases
the time needed to search for the key to be inserted or deleted,
which explains how deletions could sometimes be faster when
using local relocation than without it.
The original CSB
+- and CST-tree experiments [1,5] also
displayed faster deletions than insertions. However, their
641Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 13 ---
(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g) (h)
FIGURE 5. Effect of local relocation on the time taken by ( a–d) insertions and (e–h) deletions. The times on the y axes are in nanoseconds
per insertion or deletion; for clarity, the plot legend is shown only in (e). (a) Insertion, AthlonXP; (b) Insertion, Sempron; (c) Insertion, Atom;
(d) Insertion, Core2; (e) Deletion, AthlonXP; (f) Deletion, Sempron; (g) Deletion, Atom and (h) Deletion, Core2.
situation was different since they both only marked keys as
deleted instead of actually removing them from the tree. We
used non-lazy deletion as is standard in binary search trees.
5.3. Degradation of locality after updates
As described above, global relocation can be used to rearrange
all nodes of a tree into a good multi-level layout. A natural
question to ask is how well such a layout is preserved when
insertions and deletions are performed, either without regard to
the cache or when local relocation is used to retain some of the
cache-sensitivity.
In the experiment presented in Fig. 6, the tree was initialized
with n = 10
6 random insertions. Then the global relocation
algorithm was run once, and a number of random updates (half
insertions and half deletions) were performed. Finally, the aver-
age search time from 105 random searches was measured (after
a warmup period of 104 random searches), along with the aver-
age B1- and B2-block path lengths at the end of the experiment.
Before ∼10 5 updates after relocation (10% of the keys in the
tree), the values changed very little; for clarity, the x-axis in
Fig. 6 begins from 103 updates.
The results indicate that the cache-sensitivity of the tree
decreases signiﬁcantly only after roughly n updates have
been performed (we also observed similar behavior using
other values of n in the range 10 5 to 2.5 × 106). Though local
relocation does not quite match the cache efﬁciency of global
relocation, it maintains a clearly better memory layout than if
traditional non-cache-sensitive updates were used, thus allow-
ing the expensive global relocation algorithm to be run less
often.
5.4. Realistic operations from the TPC-C benchmark
We show results from the TPC-C experiments on two of our
four computers (Atom and Core2), since the other two did
not have enough memory to complete the larger operation
sequences.
As noted in Section4.2, in addition to using the TPC-C bench-
mark unmodiﬁed, we made two changes: initial insertions were
made non-consecutive by shufﬂing them into a random permu-
tation, and all operations were converted to searches. Figure 7
and Tables 3 and 4 show our results separately for all three
cases.
The results of the ‘Searches only’ variation are directly com-
parable with those of Fig. 4 and Table 2: this searches-only
TPC-C experiment is otherwise similar to the synthetic data
but now the search operations are distributed realistically
(according to the TPC-C benchmark) instead of being uni-
formly randomly distributed. With the TPC-C data, all search
642 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 14 ---
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
FIGURE 6. Degradation of locality when random insertions and deletions are performed after global relocation of a tree with n = 106 initial
keys: (a–d) average search time from 10 5 searches in the different computers, ( e) B1-block path length, ( f) B2-block path length. (a) Search time
(ns), AthlonXP; (b) Search time (ns), Sempron; (c) Search time (ns), Atom; (d) Search time (ns), Core2; (e) Average P′
1 (B1-sized blocks), all four
computers; (f) Average P′
2 (B2-sized blocks), all four computers.
times are two to three times as fast (compare the two rightmost
columns of Table 3 with Table 2), naturally since realistic data
exhibits much more locality than random insertions. However,
the relative efﬁciency of the relocation algorithms changes very
little; compare the percentages in Table 2 with those of Table 3.
Therefore it appears that, for all of these relocation algorithms,
the synthetic results on random searches generalize well to real-
istic non-uniform search patterns. In particular, these TPC-C
search patterns conﬁrm the main result given above related to
local relocation: that it improved search times by 26–32% (here
26–30%).
As discussed in Section 4.2, the ‘Shufﬂed insertions’ vari-
ation gives the most realistic results for the overall TPC-C
benchmark. Most of the results are more or less the same as
in the ‘Searches only’ variation (most of the operations are
searches), and so also close to the results on random searches in
Section 5.1, although relocation usually gives a slightly smaller
improvement. However, the local relocation algorithm per-
forms differently: here it gives only 8–9% improvement for the
Core2 computer and none for Atom. The reason is that inser-
tions using local relocation take more time especially on Atom
(as also seen in Fig. 5). Some of this is likely due to our proto-
type implementation of Algorithm 1 (not well optimized for its
running time), but in general it appears that local relocation is
most useful when a very large proportion of the operations are
searches (more than the 91% in the TPC-C benchmark).
643Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 15 ---
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
FIGURE 7. Results of experiments on the TPC-C benchmark: (a, d) the unmodiﬁed benchmark, (b, e) the benchmark with initial insertions
shufﬂed, (c, f) the benchmark with initial insertions shufﬂed and all other operations converted to searches. The ﬁgures give the time taken by the
steady-state phase of the benchmark, relative to the traditional red–black tree. Algorithms are named as in Fig. 4. The rightmost data point for
CSB+-trees in (d) is missing due to the computer running out of memory. (a) Unmodiﬁed, Core2; (b) Shufﬂed, Core2; (c) Searches only, Core2;
(d) Unmodiﬁed, Atom; (e) Shufﬂed, Atom; (f) Searches only, Atom.
Because ours is the ﬁrst experiment to consider cache-
sensitive search trees using real-world data, it is interesting
to consider also the performance of the B-trees. Again the
results were more or less the same as for random searches,
with slightly less improvement when insertions and deletions
are included; e.g. on Core2, CSB +-trees improved cB +-trees
by 27% (TPC-C searches only), 26% (random searches) or
24% (TPC-C shufﬂed ins.), consistent with the ‘more than
25%’ improvement reported by Rao and Ross [1] on random
operation sequences with smaller trees in 2000.
644 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 16 ---
TABLE 3. Results of experiments on the TPC-C benchmark, for 17 warehouses, including the unmodiﬁed benchmark, the benchmark with initial
insertions shufﬂed, and one with initial insertions shufﬂed and all non-initial operations converted to searches.
Time of steady-state phase (seconds) ns per search
Unmodiﬁed Shufﬂed ins. Searches only Searches only
Atom Core2 Atom Core2 Atom Core2 Atom Core2
Traditional red–black 20.38 100% 4.88 100% 11.31 100% 4.33 100% 10.56 100% 4.11 100% 929 361
Red–black local 9.71 48% 3.49 72% 11.49 102% 3.99 92% 7.34 70% 3.04 74% 646 268
Red–black global cache-obl. 5.49 27% 2.43 50% 5.57 49% 2.50 58% 4.76 45% 2.24 55% 419 197
Red–black global 5.31 26% 2.37 49% 5.40 48% 2.42 56% 4.52 43% 2.14 52% 398 188
Traditional A VL 18.09 100% 4.41 100% 10.71 100% 4.19 100% 10.41 100% 4.09 100% 916 360
A VL local 9.02 50% 3.27 74% 10.69 100% 3.81 91% 7.26 70% 3.02 74% 639 266
A VL global cache-obl. 5.17 29% 2.29 52% 5.30 49% 2.40 57% 4.76 46% 2.22 54% 419 196
A VL global 5.05 28% 2.27 51% 5.10 48% 2.31 55% 4.54 44% 2.13 52% 399 187
Plain cB
+ 6.12 100% 2.71 100% 5.63 100% 2.39 100% 5.21 100% 2.20 100% 459 194
cB+ global 5.08 83% 2.23 82% 4.15 74% 1.83 76% 3.77 72% 1.66 75% 332 146
Plain CSB+ 5.50 100% 2.14 100% 4.97 100% 1.82 100% 4.31 100% 1.61 100% 379 142
CSB+ global 5.24 95% 2.12 99% 4.52 91% 1.70 94% 3.88 90% 1.50 93% 342 132
Names of trees are as in Table 2. The steady-state phase of the benchmark included 9.5 × 105 insertions, 6.6 × 104 deletions and 1.0 × 107 search
operations (1.1 × 107 searches for the Searches only variation). The last two columns give the total time divided by the number of searches, directly
comparable with the times in Table 2.
TABLE 4. Path lengths and memory use for the TPC-C benchmark reported in Table3. The ﬁnal tree hasn = 10 228 847 ≈ 107 keys (cf. Table2),
or n = 9 345 023 in the Searches only variation.
Average path length in ﬁnal tree Size of ﬁnal tree
Unmodiﬁed Shufﬂed ins. Searches only Unmod Shufﬂ Srchs
Nodes P′
1 P′
2 Nodes P′
1 P′
2 Nodes P′
1 P′
2 MB MB MB
Traditional red–black 22.8 22.3 17.3 24.0 23.9 19.9 22.7 22.0 18.0 156 156 143
Red–black local 22.8 13.6 11.5 24.0 14.0 13.9 22.7 13.5 12.3 187 182 164
Red–black global cache-obl. 22.8 12.8 7.1 24.0 15.5 9.9 22.7 11.8 6.1 176 202 204
Red–black global 22.8 11.4 4.4 24.0 13.8 6.9 22.7 10.5 3.3 171 161 163
Traditional A VL 22.7 22.1 17.6 22.8 22.8 17.6 22.6 21.9 17.7 156 156 143
A VL local 22.7 13.2 11.0 22.8 13.5 12.8 22.6 13.4 11.9 190 183 165
A VL global cache-obl. 22.7 13.2 7.4 22.8 12.5 7.0 22.6 11.8 6.1 193 202 204
A VL global 22.7 11.8 4.7 22.8 11.3 4.2 22.6 10.5 3.3 168 164 163
Plain cB
+ 12.0 12.0 9.3 10.0 10.0 9.1 9.0 9.0 8.5 264 164 140
cB+ global 12.0 12.0 3.8 10.0 10.0 5.4 9.0 9.0 3.0 264 179 179
Plain CSB+ 9.0 9.0 8.9 8.0 8.0 7.9 7.0 7.0 6.9 521 241 192
CSB+ global 9.0 9.0 6.0 8.0 8.0 6.7 7.0 7.0 5.0 521 241 193
Finally, since large numbers of consecutive insertions com-
monly occur in practice, it is interesting to look at their effect
by comparing the unmodiﬁed benchmark with the shufﬂed ini-
tial insertions. Table 4 shows one of the main effects: greatly
increased space usage in the B-trees. This is unsurprising—
most of the nodes are half full—although it may be interesting
to note that CSB
+-trees are even worse, consecutive insertions
more than doubling the space usage. 8 Comparing running
times (Table 3, columns ‘Unmodiﬁed’ and ‘Shufﬂed ins.’),
the B-trees are somewhat slower after consecutive insertions,
8 Many of the node groups in the CSB+-trees are also half full after consecu-
tive insertions. Rao and Ross [1] discuss other variants of CSB+-trees that have
better space usage at the expense of performance.
645Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 17 ---
but the binary search trees are actually slightly faster. Thus,
optimized B-trees need special code for consecutive insertions,
while binary search trees do not.
6. RELATED WORK
Most of the research on the effect of caching on 1D search
trees has concentrated on variants of the B-tree. The simplest
cache-sensitive B-tree variant is an ordinary B +-tree where
the node size is chosen to match the size of a cache block
(e.g. 64 or 128 bytes) [3]. Rao and Ross [1] have designed a
more advanced version called the Cache-Sensitive B +-tree or
CSB+-tree, which increases the fanout of the tree by removing
most of the child pointers and storing the children of a node
consecutively in memory. The CSB
+-tree has been further opti-
mized using a variety of techniques, such as prefetching [16],
choosing the node size more carefully [2], storing only partial
keys in nodes [17] and other key compression techniques [18].
(Many of these additional optimization techniques could also
be applied to binary search trees and the relocation algorithms
of the present article.)
More recently, Lee et al. [5,19] have made the T-tree cache-
sensitive. The T-tree is an internal binary search tree where each
node contains a up to a ﬁxed number of keys that are consec-
utive, i.e. the tree has no other keys between the smallest and
largest keys stored in a T-tree node. (In contrast, two keys that
are consecutive in an internal B-tree node have a whole subtree
of keys between them.) Unlike a traditional T-tree, the cache-
sensitive T-tree (CST-tree) is not binary. Instead, at the outer-
most level the CST-tree is anm-way tree with cache-block-sized
nodes (thus m = O(B) where B is the cache block size). Each
node stores a small implicit-pointer binary tree in an array, and
its children are stored consecutively in memory as in the CSB
+-
tree. This structure is used as an index to ‘data nodes’, which
(like traditional T-tree nodes) store a ﬁxed number of consecu-
tive keys in an array. The advantage of this separate index struc-
ture is that it only needs to store the maximum key of each data
node, since only the maximum keys are required to search down
the tree.
As in the CSB
+-tree, a single structure modiﬁcation (split
in CSB+-trees, a special rotation in CST-trees) requires O(B2)
time, where B is the cache block size, since it may need to
modify all children of an m-way node (because they are stored
consecutively). CST- and CSB +-trees have been compared
experimentally by Kim et al. [20] and Lee et al. [5].
The above structures were optimized to only one level
of the cache (i.e. one ﬁxed cache block size—we call this a
single-level model), often the one closest to the CPU. Rah-
man et al. [21] and Chen et al. [22] have examined B-trees in
two-level memory hierarchies: both use one cache block size
together with the page size of the computer (the page size is
used for the TLB and for possibly storing pages on disk). The
approach of Rahman et al. [21] and the ‘disk-ﬁrst’ approach
of Chen et al. [22] use page-sized B-tree nodes and alter the
internal structure of the node to be cache-optimized. In contrast,
the ‘cache-ﬁrst’ approach of Chen et al. [22] uses small-node
B-trees (with cache-optimized node size), laying them out on
disk pages intelligently, for instance keeping parents and chil-
dren together. The on-disk layout of the cache-ﬁrst approach
very loosely resembles our local relocation, but it is based on
splitting whole disk pages (recall that our approach only moves
a constant number of nodes). Their approach does not easily
generalize to binary search trees, since it is based on splitting
pages of nodes after B-tree node splits and not rotations which
would alter the depths of the nodes; it also requires additional
parent and sibling links in the tree.
In the more generic multi-level model with more than
two separate cache block sizes, research has concentrated on
methods of laying out an existing tree statically [4,12].
Several B-trees have been proposed in the cache-oblivious
model, including the original rather complex cache-oblivious
B-tree by Bender et al. [23], its two simpler variants [24,25],
and a string B-tree optimized for longer keys [26]. They are
based on weight-balanced B-trees [27] and a dynamically
updated sparse array called the packed-memory array [23,28],
and their structure and rebalancing operations are dictated by
the cache-oblivious memory layout. Some variants [25,29]
use a static implicit-pointer binary search tree (a complete
tree stored in a cache-oblivious layout without pointers) in
addition to the packed-memory array. Rebalancing in all of
these depends on rebuilding or copying parts of the structures
(both the tree and the packed-memory array), and most of the
complexity bounds are amortized. Unlike the cache-sensitive
B-trees, the cache-oblivious trees are not direct extensions of
the usual height-balanced B-trees [30] or(a, b)-trees [31]. Thus,
much of the extensive literature on optimizing B-trees and,
e.g. supporting concurrency and crash recovery in databases
(Graefe [32] gives a recent survey), does not directly apply to
these structures.
Bender et al. [33] have shown that the best cache-oblivious
layout is never more than 44% worse in the number of block
transfers than an optimal cache-sensitive layout, and the two
converge when the number of levels of caches increases. How-
ever, the cache-sensitive model remains important, because
the number of levels of caches with different block sizes
is small in practice (at least currently—for instance, only
two in the four computers we used for our experiments in
this article). Several experiments where the two models are
compared [21,24,34] support the intuition that (especially
multi-level) cache-sensitive search structures are more efﬁcient
than cache-oblivious ones.
In a cache-sensitive binary search tree, the node size cannot
be chosen as freely as in a B-tree. Instead, ﬁxed-size nodes can
be placed in memory so that each cache block contains nodes
that are close to each other in the tree. Explicit-pointer binary
search trees in the cache-oblivious model have been considered
by Jiang et al. [35], who present a cache-oblivious splay tree
based on periodically rearranging all nodes in memory.
646 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 18 ---
For the cache-sensitive model, Oksanen and Malmi [11] give
a single-level periodic-rearrangement algorithm for explicit-
pointer binary trees. Gil and Itai [12] and Bender et al. [4]
analyze a similar single-level layout, but extended to unbal-
anced trees and non-uniform search patterns. Gil and Itai [12]
show that ﬁnding an optimal layout in this model when also
optimizing for space is NP-complete, while Bender et al.
[4] give an efﬁcient layout algorithm that is almost optimal.
Chilimbi et al. [36] study cache-sensitive data structures from a
different point of view, giving semi-automatic tools for reorga-
nizing tree-like structures in existing programs, using the same
style of single-level layout as the others.
Recently, Askitis and Zobel [37] have examined the problem
of storing variable-length strings in various search structures,
including cache-sensitive binary trees. Unlike the structures
mentioned above, their tree nodes are not ﬁxed-size, since they
contain the string keys (instead of pointers to them). One of the
structures they use is a ‘clustered BST’, which is organized in
the layout of Chilimbi et al. [36], but does not support dynamic
cache-sensitive updates. They also propose an ‘array BST’,
which stores the nodes in an array in order of insertion, which
they argue is cache-efﬁcient for a non-rebalanced binary search
tree (though in our terminology, it is not cache-sensitive, since
the cache block size is not used).
None of these binary-tree layouts consider the problem of
maintaining a cache-sensitive layout in insertion or deletion,
except via periodically rearranging the whole tree into the
cache-sensitive layout.
7. BINARY TREES VERSUS B-TREES
To the best of our knowledge, the experiments presented above
are the ﬁrst ones to compare various kinds of cache-sensitive
binary trees and B-trees with each other. Unfortunately, from the
point of view of the main topic of this article, on average the
cache-sensitive B-trees outperformed most of the binary search
trees: often the best binary trees were about as fast as the cache-
sensitive B-trees, and implementing multi-level rearrangement
in the B-trees made them faster.
Because of the large number of pointers per stored element,
the structure of binary search trees is not ideally suited to hier-
archical memory. However, our goal in this research was to ﬁnd
out how much binary trees can be improved with regard to the
cache while keeping their essential properties. We feel that this
is important, because binary trees are very commonly used in
practice.
9
An algorithmic advantage of binary trees is that rotations are
constant-time operations, unlike B-tree node splits or merges,
9 To mention only a few examples, pdfTEX uses A VL trees for font mapping,
the OpenBSD kernel ﬁrewall uses red–black trees to store active network con-
nections, many parts of the Linux kernel use red–black trees, and the ordered
dictionary data structure in the Java and C++ standard libraries is usually imple-
mented as a red–black tree.
which, for a cache block size B1, take O(B1) time in B-trees
with B1-sized nodes or O(B2
1) in the full CSB +-tree. The
cache-sensitive T-tree (CST-tree) also uses rotations—although
not ordinary rotations, since the outermost tree of a CST-tree is
non-binary—but unlike our solution, it needs to spend O(B2
1)
time on each level of the tree to re-establish its stricter memory
layout. Thus, our binary search trees have good worst-case
performance for a single insertion or deletion, which could be
useful in a real-time application. Constant-time rotations may
also improve concurrency: nodes are locked for a shorter dura-
tion. In fact, A VL trees were quite recently used as the basis of
a fast and scalable concurrent search tree that applies optimistic
concurrency control techniques [38].
CST-trees use small binary search trees as part of their
structure, although not in a form that our cache-sensitive meth-
ods could directly improve. In principle our methods could
be used to redesign the CST-tree, giving an alternative with
constant-time rotations (instead of O(B
2
1)), but with less efﬁ-
cient searches, since we are not as aggressive as the CST-tree
in avoiding pointers.
Many modern large-scale applications of search trees employ
path copying: instead of modifying nodes in-place, updates
are made by copying the root-to-leaf path. This path has min-
imal size in binary trees, as Soisalon-Soininen and Widmayer
[6] showed in connection with a full-text index that uses path
copying for efﬁcient crash recovery and transaction roll-
back. A more recent example is the scalable and distributed
ﬂash-memory-based database Hyder [7], which also cites the
small size of the copied path as the reason to use binary trees.
Although more efﬁcient in binary trees, path copying is also
used with non-binary trees, for instance in the write-optimized
B-tree [39]. Other well-known uses of path copying include
persistent or multi-version search trees.
8. CONCLUSIONS
We have examined how to use knowledge of the hardware
cache to improve the performance of binary search trees. To
retain the essential properties of binary search trees, we set
ourselves the following restrictions: structure modiﬁcations
(rotations) must remain constant-time, and the rebalancing
algorithm (which rotations to perform) or structure of the nodes
must not be changed. This also makes our methods applicable
not only to the usual A VL and red–black trees, but to any binary
search tree that uses rotations for balancing.
The best improvement possible with our restrictions was
approximated by the non-dynamic global relocation algo-
rithm: 51–56% faster searches in large A VL and red–black
trees in our experiments. Our dynamic solution was based on
a memory-layout invariant dictating that cache blocks should
contain at least α connected nodes. Its simplest form (α = 2)
gave 26–32% improvement, more than half of the much more
complex non-dynamic approach; this was true for both random
searches and the search pattern of the TPC-C benchmark. The
647Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 19 ---
improvement is also consistent with our theoretical analysis
(Theorem 3.1), which predicted 33% improvement in path
lengths with α = 2, up to 50% if α is increased.
We showed that preserving the invariant increases the time
complexity of insertion and deletion by only a constant. Our
experiments showed that the improved search path length actu-
ally made deletions slightly faster, but insertions were at worst
about twice as slow (this was heavily machine-dependent). We
feel that in many applications this update cost is a reasonable
price to pay for the increase in search efﬁciency.
We also combined our dynamic approach with a non-dynamic
relocation algorithm, ﬁnding (experimentally) that the mem-
ory layout produced by the non-dynamic algorithm degraded
relatively slowly in future insertions and deletions when our
dynamic approach was in use. It thus seems viable to main-
tain an even better memory layout by executing the expensive
non-dynamic algorithm periodically in addition to our dynamic
approach, if the large worst-case cost is not a problem.
A natural extension of our invariant would be to handle
multi-level caches in some way. However, combining the
multi-level model with the restriction to constant-time structure
modiﬁcations does not seem feasible: for instance, it would not
be possible to move a cache-block-sized area of nodes to re-
establish a higher-level invariant after a structure modiﬁcation.
A direction for future research could be to lift this constraint to
create a dynamic multi-level cache-sensitive search tree (based
on either a B-tree or a binary search tree) using the technique of
preserving a memory-layout invariant while keeping the struc-
ture of the nodes and rebalancing strategy otherwise intact.
(Recall that unlike our approach, CSB
+-trees, CST-trees and
cache-oblivious B-trees all require extensive changes to the
underlying tree structure.)
Since path copying is most efﬁcient in binary trees, another
interesting topic would be to apply cache-sensitivity to a copy-
on-write binary search tree. The solution of the present article is
not directly suitable for this problem, since updates need to copy
the entire root-to-leaf path, but perhaps the approach of using a
memory-layout invariant would be useful, for instance to copy
some extra nodes in the new path to preserve cache-sensitivity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Preliminary versions of some of the results in this article were
published in [13,14].
FUNDING
This research was partially supported by the Academy of
Finland.
REFERENCES
[1] Rao, J. and Ross, K.A. (2000) Making B +-Trees Cache Con-
scious in Main Memory. 2000 ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Man-
agement of Data, Dallas, TX, USA, May 16–18, pp. 475–486.
ACM Press, New Y ork.
[2] Hankins, R.A. and Patel, J.M. (2003) Effect of Node Size on the
Performance of Cache-Conscious B +-Trees. 2003 ACM SIG-
METRICS Int. Conf. Measurement and Modeling of Computer
Systems, San Diego, CA, USA, June 10–14, pp. 283–294. ACM
Press, New Y ork.
[3] Rao, J. and Ross, K.A. (1999) Cache Conscious Indexing for
Decision-Support in Main Memory. 25th Int. Conf. V ery Large
Data Bases (VLDB 1999), Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, September
7–10, pp. 78–89. Morgan Kaufmann, Burlington.
[4] Bender, M.A., Demaine, E.D. and Farach-Colton, M. (2002)
Efﬁcient Tree Layout in a Multilevel Memory Hierarchy. 10th
Annual European Symp. Algorithms (ESA 2002) , Rome, Italy,
September 17–21, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2461, pp.
165–173. Springer, Berlin.
[5] Lee, I., Lee, S. and Shim, J. (2011) Making T-trees cache con-
scious on commodity microprocessors. J. Inf. Sci. Eng., 27, 143–
161.
[6] Soisalon-Soininen, E. and Widmayer, P . (1999) Concurrency
and Recovery in Full-Text Indexing. String Processing and
Information Retrieval Symposium (SPIRE 1999), Cancun, Mex-
ico, September 21–24, pp. 192–198. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC.
[7] Bernstein, P .A., Reid, C.W. and Das, S. (2011) Hyder – A Trans-
actional Record Manager for Shared Flash. 5th Biennial Conf.
Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR 2011), Asilomar, CA,
USA, January 9–12, pp. 9–20.
[8] Haeupler, B., Sen, S. and Tarjan, R.E. (2009) Rank-Balanced
Trees. 11th Algorithms and Data Structures Symposium (WADS
2009), Banff, Canada, August 21–23, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 5664, pp. 351–362. Springer, Berlin.
[9] Soisalon-Soininen, E. and Widmayer, P . (2003) Single and Bulk
Updates in Stratiﬁed Trees: An Amortized and Worst-Case
Analysis. Computer Science in Perspective: Essays Dedicated
to Thomas Ottmann, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2598,
pp. 278–292. Springer, Berlin.
[10] Transaction Processing Performance Council (2010) TPC bench-
mark C. Standard Speciﬁcation, Revision 5.11.
[11] Oksanen, K. and Malmi, L. (1995) Memory reference locality
and periodic relocation in main memory search trees.5th Hellenic
Conf. Informatics. Greek Computer Society.
[12] Gil, J. and Itai, A. (1999) How to pack trees. J. Algorithms, 32,
108–132.
[13] Saikkonen, R. and Soisalon-Soininen, E. (2008) Cache-sensitive
memory layout for binary trees. 5th IFIP Int. Conf. Theoretical
Computer Science (IFIP TCS 2008), Milan, Italy, September 8–
10, IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 273,
pp. 241–255. Springer, Berlin.
[14] Saikkonen, R. (2009) Bulk Updates and Cache Sensitivity in
Search Trees. PhD Thesis, Helsinki University of Technology.
[15] Karlton, P . L., Fuller, S.H., Scroggs, R.E. and Kaehler, E.B.
(1976) Performance of height-balanced trees. Commun. ACM,
19, 23–28.
[16] Chen, S., Gibbons, P .B. and Mowry, T.C. (2001) Improving
Index Performance Through Prefetching. 2001 ACM SIGMOD
Int. Conf. Management of Data , Santa Barbara, CA, USA, May
21–24, pp. 235–246. ACM Press, New Y ork.
648 R. Saikkonen and E. Soisalon-Soininen
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 20 ---
[17] Bohannon, P ., McIlroy, P . and Rastogi, R. (2001) Main-memory
Index Structures with Fixed-size Partial Keys. 2001 ACM SIG-
MOD Int. Conf. Management of Data, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,
May 21–24, pp. 163–174. ACM Press, New Y ork.
[18] Jin, R. and Chung, T.-S. (2010) Node Compression Techniques
Based on Cache-Sensitive B +-Tree. 9th IEEE/ACIS Int. Conf.
Computer and Information Science (ICIS 2010), Y amagata,
Japan, August 18–20, pp. 133–138. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC.
[19] Lee, I., Shim, J., Lee, S. and Chun, J. (2007) CST-trees: Cache
sensitive T-trees. 12th Int. Conf. Database Systems for Advanced
Applications (DASF AA2007), Bangkok, Thailand, April 9–12,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4443, pp. 398–409. Springer,
Berlin.
[20] Kim, K., Shim, J. and Lee, I. (2007) Cache Conscious Trees: How
do they Perform on Contemporary Commodity Microproces-
sors. 5th Int. Conf. Computational Science and its Applications
(ICCSA 2007), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, August 26–29, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science 4705, pp. 189–200. Springer,
Berlin.
[21] Rahman, N., Cole, R. and Raman, R. (2001) Optimised Prede-
cessor Data Structures for Internal Memory. 5th Workshop on
Algorithm Engineering (WAE 2001), Aarhus, Denmark, August
28–31, pp. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2141, pp. 67–78.
Springer, Berlin.
[22] Chen, S., Gibbons, P .B., Mowry, T.C. and V alentin, G . (2002)
Fractal Prefetching B
+-trees: Optimizing Both Cache and Disk
Performance. 2002 ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Management of
Data, Madison, WI, USA, June 2–6, pp. 157–168. ACM Press,
New Y ork.
[23] Bender, M.A., Demaine, E.D. and Farach-Colton, M. (2005)
Cache-oblivious B-trees. SIAM J. Comput., 35, 341–358.
[24] Brodal, G .S., Fagerberg, R. and Jacob, R. (2002) Cache Oblivi-
ous Search Trees via Binary Trees of Small Height. 13th Annual
ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2002),S a n
Francisco, CA, January 6–8, pp. 39–48. Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia.
[25] Bender, M. A., Duan, Z., Iacono, J. and Wu, J. (2002) A Locality-
Preserving Cache-Oblivious Dynamic Dictionary. 13th Annual
ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2002), San Fran-
cisco, CA, USA, January 6–8, pp. 29–38. Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia.
[26] Bender, M.A., Farach-Colton, M. and Kuszmaul, B. C. (2006)
Cache-Oblivious String B-Trees. 25th ACM SIGACT–SIGMOD–
SIGART Symp. Principles of Database Systems (PODS 2006),
Chicago, IL, USA, June 26–28, pp. 233–242. ACM Press,
New Y ork.
[27] Arge, L. and Vitter, J.S. (2003) Optimal external memory interval
management. SIAM J. Comput., 22, 1488–1508.
[28] Itai, A., Konheim, A.G . and Rodeh, M. (1981) A Sparse
Table Implementation of Priority Queues. 8th Colloquium on
Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP 1981), Acre,
Israel, July 13–17, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 115, pp.
417–431. Springer, Berlin.
[29] Kasheff, Z. (2004) Cache-oblivious dynamic search trees. Mas-
ter’s Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[30] Bayer, R. and McCreight, E. (1972) Organization and mainte-
nance of large ordered indexes. Acta Inform., 1, 173–189.
[31] Huddleston, S. and Mehlhorn, K. (1982) A new data structure for
representing sorted lists. Acta Inform., 17, 157–184.
[32] Graefe, G . (2010) Modern B-tree techniques. Found. Trends
Databases, 3, 203–402.
[33] Bender, M.A., Brodal, G .S., Fagerberg, R., Ge, D., He, S., Hu,
H., Iacono, J. and López-Ortiz, A. (2003) The Cost of Cache-
Oblivious Searching. 44th Annual IEEE Symp. Foundations of
Computer Science (FOCS 2003), Cambridge, MA, USA, Octo-
ber 11–14, pp. 271–282. IEEE Computer Society, Washington,
DC.
[34] He, B. and Luo, Q. (2008) Cache-oblivious databases: lim-
itations and opportunities. ACM Trans. Database Syst., 33,
doi:10.1145/1366102.1366105.
[35] Jiang, W., Ding, C. and Cheng, R. (2004) Memory Access
Analysis and Optimization Approaches on Splay Trees. 7th
Workshop on Languages, Compilers and Run-time Support for
Scalable Systems (LCR 2004), Houston, TX, USA, October
21–23, pp. 1–6. ACM Press, New Y ork.
[36] Chilimbi, T.M., Hill, M.D. and Larus, J.R. (1999) Cache-
Conscious Structure Layout. ACM SIGPLAN 1999 Conf.
Programming Language Design and Implementation , Atlanta,
GA, USA, May 1–4, pp. 1–12. ACM Press, New Y ork.
[37] Askitis, N. and Zobel, J. (2011) Redesigning the string hash
table, burst trie, and BST to exploit cache. A C MJ .E x p .A l g o -
rithmics, 15, doi:10.1145/1671970.1921704.
[38] Bronson, N.G ., Casper, J., Chaﬁ, H. and Olukotun, K. (2010) A
Practical Concurrent Binary Search Tree. 15th ACM SIGPLAN
Symp. Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, Banga-
lore, India, January 9–14, pp. 257–268. ACM Press, New Y ork.
[39] Graefe, G . (2004) Write-Optimized B-Trees. 30th Int. Conf. V ery
Large Data Bases (VLDB 2004), Toronto, Canada, August 31–
September 3, pp. 672–683. Morgan Kaufmann, Burlington.
649Cache-Sensitive Memory Layout for Dynamic Binary Trees
Section A: Computer Science Theory, Methods and Tools
The Computer Journal, V ol.59      No. 5, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/5/630/2568636 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026

