=== PAPER: P24-NaderanTahan2016
=== FILENAME: WhyDoes Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads.pdf
=== PAGES: 16

--- PAGE 1 ---
c⃝ The British Computer Society 2015. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Advance Access publication on 23 December 2015 doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxv112
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work
for Modern Workloads?
Mahmood Naderan-Tahan1 and Hamid Sarbazi-Azad 1,2∗
1Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Azadi Av., Tehran, Iran
2School of Computer Science, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran
∗Corresponding author: azad@sharif.edu
Emerging cloud workloads in today’s modern data centers have large memory footprints that make
the processor’s caches to be ineffective. Since L1 data cache is in the critical path, high data cache
miss rates degrade the performance. To ﬁx the issue in traditional workloads, data prefetchers pre-
dict the needed data to hide the memory latency and ultimately improve performance. In this paper,
we focus on the L1 data cache to answer the question on why state-of-the-art prefetching methods are
inefﬁcient for modern workloads in terms of performance and energy consumption? This is because
L1 cache is the most important player affecting the processor performance. Results show that, on the
one hand, these workloads suffer from low temporal locality and address repetition, and their consec-
utive accesses exhibit better spatial locality compared with the traditional workloads. On the other
hand, miss patterns are spatially irregular and there is little opportunity to eliminate repetitive miss
patterns. Because of these reasons, prefetching methods have poor performance and, with respect
to more accesses to the lower memory levels, it is not energy efﬁcient to use prefetchers for modern
workloads.
Keywords: multicore architecture; hardware prefetching; scale-out workloads; workload characterization
Received 13 March 2015; revised 10 September 2015
Handling editor: Alan Marshall
1. INTRODUCTION
With the ever increasing volume of human and machine-
generated data, big data and modern workloads 1 exhibit large
amount of datasets that are split into shards and spread across
multiple storage units. To close the gap between the core and
the memory, multiple levels of caches are employed. The
ﬁrst-level data cache is primarily responsible for capturing the
working set by keeping the most referenced memory addresses.
However, the memory footprints of such workloads are large
and data cache is not able to capture the whole referenced
addresses. As a result, a fraction of accesses are missed in the
cache.
The most straightforward approach to hide the memory
latency and capturing such a large memory footprint is to use
large caches. Although a large cache increases the hit rate, it
suffers from high access latency. Figure 1 shows a survey of
commercial micro-architectures that incorporate small data
caches to maintain low access latency. Therefore, using a large
1 In this paper, we use big data, modern, cloud and scale-out workloads
interchangeably since their differences do not affect this work.
cache is not an appropriate technique. Another approach for
hiding the memory latency is reducing cache misses via archi-
tectural designs, called data prefetching , while using small
caches. With the help of repetitions and regulations observed in
the memory access stream, it is possible to ﬁnd patterns in the
references by tracking the history and predict future addresses.
This approach has been widely studied for compute-intensive
and single-thread workloads, typically SPEC CPU [ 1–10].
Also in multi-core architectures, the prefetchers are evaluated
with a set of multi-program workloads [ 11–18].
Traditional server workloads, which are basically multi-
threaded, feature spatial correlation in the memory access
stream. By tracking the memory references in large regions
consisting of multiple cache blocks, it is possible to cover
30–60% of L1 misses [ 19, 20]. However, the pros and cons of
prefetching methods for modern workloads have received little
attention. For example, without mentioning the reason, [ 21]
showed that disabling Next-Line prefetcher has no impact on
the performance.
This paper is a study on modern workloads to evaluate dif-
ferent aspects of prefetching methods. The focus of this work
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 2 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 245
FIGURE 1. L1 data cache size trend over the past decade. While
larger L1 data cache is desired in emerging applications, proces-
sor manufactures do not tend to push up its size because of latency
constraints.
is the L1 data cache since L1 cache has a crucial effect on sys-
tem performance. While the L1 instruction cache has high hit
ratio for most of the modern workloads and L2 is able to cap-
ture the instruction working sets, L1 data cache exhibit high
miss rate [21]. Since L1 data cache is the ﬁrst place for access-
ing data blocks, such high miss rates are important sources of
poor performance. We ﬁrst show that current state-of-the-art
prefetching methods have low performance. Next, we conduct
a series of locality analysis on programs memory references as
well as cache miss analyses and show that there exist key differ-
ences between traditional and modern workloads. In traditional
workloads the opportunity for efﬁcient prefetching is high
because misses are spatially predictable or temporally repeat-
able. However, most of the cloud workloads have irregular and
unpredictable miss patterns in memory space and there is little
opportunity for temporally eliminating repetitive miss patterns.
With such a knowledge, we show that prefetching methods are
not energy efﬁcient since they increase costly accesses to lower
levels of memory much higher than the achieved performance.
Brieﬂy, the empirical evaluations of this work show:
(i) Existing history-based prefetchers that were originally
proposed for desktop and server workloads are quite
inefﬁcient in reducing cache misses. The main prob-
lem is high overprediction rates that means prefetched
blocks are evicted without any access and cache is ﬁlled
with useless blocks.
(ii) Modern workloads feature poor temporal locality and
there are large number of accesses with few repetitions.
Therefore, there are little opportunities for address
correlation prefetchers. Reuse distance analysis shows
that unlike other workloads, there are variable reuses at
different distances. This feature is similar to traditional
workloads with high miss rates.
(iii) Near neighbor accesses of scale-out workloads have
strong spatial locality even more compared to other
applications.
TABLE 1. Main characteristics of the simulated system. The
latencies assume 45 nm process at 2.5 GHz.
Processor UltraSPARC-III ISA, 8-stage pipeline, out
of order, 4-wide dispatch/retirement,
96-entry ROB, 32-entry LSQ, 16-entry
store buffer, 2.5 GHz, 45 nm
L1 caches Split I/D, 64KB private, 2-way, 64B, LRU,
write-through, 2-cycle hit latency,
32-entry MSHR
L2 cache 8 MB shared, uniﬁed, non-inclusive,
8-way, 64B, LRU, write-back, 10-cycle
hit latency, 64-entry MSHR (instruction
and data)
Main memory 64 GB, 60 ns access latency, 4 memory
controllers
(iv) There is no regularity for cache misses even in large
memory regions. Even that some workloads exhibit a
degree of regularity, miss patterns are complex.
(v) There is little opportunity for eliminating temporal
repetitive misses because a large fraction of misses are
non-repetitive.
(vi) In cache-friendly applications, top reused consecutive
deltas mostly result in hit and in prefetch-friendly appli-
cations, they symmetrically hit or miss in cache. How-
ever, in scale-out workloads they randomly hit/miss in
the cache; hence delta correlation prefetchers wrongly
predict future addresses.
(vii) Prefetchers are not energy efﬁcient because with the
increase in the number of memory requests, more costly
accesses are made to the lower memory levels.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
explains the methodology and workloads. Section 3 evaluates
the efﬁciency of well-known prefetchers. In Section 4, local-
ity analyses are explained. Section 5 presents cache analysis.
Section 6 discusses the energy aspects of using prefetchers for
scale-out workloads. Section 7 presents the related work and
Section 8 summarizes this study.
2. EV ALUATION METHODOLOGY
The focus of this paper is the data cache and for evaluations
we use trace-driven and full system simulations of a multi-core
processor using FLEXUS [ 22]. We simulate a 16-core direc-
tory based shared L2 multi-core system, which is common in
today’s server market, running Solaris 9. The list of simulation
parameters are presented in Table 1.
Through this paper, we compare these workloads with a set
of reference workloads. The reference workloads are selected
based on some metrics that are described below.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 3 ---
246 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
TABLE 2. Characteristics of workloads. In addition to Cloudsuite, some traditional desktop and server workloads have been selected. In the
analyses, Vips and milc are considered as cache-friendly and others have the same or higher miss rates than Cloudsuite. MPKI represents number
of misses in L1 data cache per 1K instructions.
Workload Description Input Miss ratio (%) MPKI
Data serving Key-value NoSQL data store Cassandra, 15 GB YCSB dataset 5.66 7.06
Cloudsuite
Map-Reduce Large scale analysis Bayesian classiﬁcation algorithm, 4.5 GB set of
Wikipedia pages
6.39 7.44
Web frontend Web services for availability Cloudstone, 12 GB on-disk ﬁle dataset 2.59 4.70
SA T solver Software testing Cloud9 symbolic execution, command-line printf 3.2 4.40
Web search Index Serving Node Nutch/Lucene, 230 clients, 1.4 GB index, 15 GB
data segment
2.47 4.38
Media streaming Video streaming server Darwin Streaming Server, 7500 clients, 60 GB
data set
5.73 7.92
Traditional
Vips Image processing 1 image, 2662 × 5500 pixels 0.15 0.3
Libquantum Quantum computing reference input 12.2 11.3
lbm Computational Fluid Dynamics reference input 22 52.7
milc Quantum Chromodynamics reference input 0.5 1.8
Soplex Simplex Linear Program (LP)
Solver
reference input (pds) 8.9 24.6
hmmer Search a gene sequence database reference input (nph) 2.5 5.6
Server
Oracle Online Transaction Processing 100 warehouses (10 GB), 16 clients, 1.4 GB SGA 6.4 11.7
Apache Web Server 16K connections, FastCGI, worker threading
model
5.8 11.6
(i) Cache friendliness: This type of workloads have low
miss rates at the ﬁrst level data cache. As a result,
temporal and/or spatial localities exist in the stream
of memory accesses and cache captures the work-
ing set of the applications. We call a workload to be
cache-friendly if the miss rate is less than 0.5% or the
number of misses per kilo instruction is less than 1.
(ii) Prefetch friendliness: This type of workloads have typ-
ically high miss rates; hence they lack either temporal
or spatial (or both) localities. However, a large fraction
of misses are covered with existing prefetchers by ﬁnd-
ing the correlations among previous accesses. We call a
workload to be prefetch-friendly if there exists at least
one history-based method that can cover at least 50% of
misses.
Table 2 shows the list of benchmarks with their parameters.
Cloudsuite is a benchmark suite of emerging and modern
scale-out workloads which consists of six benchmarks [ 21].
For comparison, we use some traditional desktop and server
workloads with different properties. We select Vips from PAR-
SEC suite [ 23] and milc from SPEC CPU2006 [ 24] because
they have high hit rates (99.85 and 99.5%, respectively),
therefore they are cache-friendly. Other workloads including
libquantum, lbm, soplex, hmmer, Oracle and Apache have the
same or higher miss rates than Cloudsuite. For example, the
miss rate of lbm is 22% which is the highest in our selection.
3. EV ALUATION OF PRIOR PREFETCHERS
In order to see the ability of current history-based data
prefetchers for reducing cache misses, we have selected
some stat-of-the-art methods that were originally proposed for
both SPECCPU and server workloads. We have considered
a number of features for selecting the methods including the
popularity, publication data and performance (speciﬁcally the
coverage). Furthermore, the selected methods are able to track
the history in both time and space dimensions. We have not
selected throttling methods
2 because, as we discuss later, the
low coverages achieved by prefetching methods are not related
to pollution.
NLP: Next-Line-Prefetching method is the simplest and ear-
liest method that on every access to a block,X , issues a prefetch
request for the next block, X + 1.
Stream: The concept of stream prefetching has been pre-
sented in [ 8, 25–27]. This method is capable of tracking
multiple access streams and for each of them, a tracking entry
is created in the table which can be one of four different states:
(1) Invalid: Initially all tracking entries are in this state. (2)Allo-
cated: Upon a demand miss, the block address is allocated in
a table if there is no matching entry for that. (3) Training: The
prefetcher trains the direction of the stream based on the next
two misses that occur ±16 cache blocks from the ﬁrst miss
2 Such methods increase/decrease the prefetch degree based on some metrics
including cache pollution in the presence of prefetcher.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 4 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 247
and (4) Monitor and Request: The tracking entry monitors
the accesses to a memory region from a start pointer (A)t o
an end pointer (P). The maximum distance between the start
and end pointers is determined by Prefetch Distance. If there
is a demand access to a block in the monitored region, the
prefetcher issues cache blocks [ P + 1, ... , P + N] for ascend-
ing direction ([ P − 1, ... , P − N] for descending directions),
where N is called the Prefetch Degree. Next, the tracking entry
moves the monitoring region and starts to monitor the region
between A + N to P + N. In our implementation, we conﬁgure
the aggressiveness in the middle-of-the-road with a prefetch
distance of 16 and a prefetch degree of 2.
3
GHB: Global History Buffer is an n-entry FIFO table that
keeps track of the n most recent accesses [ 4]. Each entry stores
a pair of an address and a link pointer and entries are chained
in a time-ordered fashion. An index table holds the initial
pointers to the GHB entries which can be indexed in vari-
ous ways. As a result, different history-based methods can be
implemented. Usually the index table tracks the PCs (program
counter) to localize the accesses. The GHB table is responsi-
ble for tracking the history and extracts correlations among
previous accesses. In the delta correlation (DC) implementa-
tion, every two chained entries are assigned with a delta value.
With a predeﬁned prefetching degree, d,t h el a s td entries in
the GHB form the pattern and GHB is searched to ﬁnd the last
occurrence of the pattern. Once it is found, the next d deltas are
used to generate new addresses. The index table and GHB in
our simulations have 64 and 1K entries.
ISB: Irregular stream buffer is an extended implementation
of the original GHB targeting irregular access patterns [ 18].
In this method, an extra level of indirection is used to create
a new structural address space in which correlated physical
addresses are assigned consecutive structural addresses. The
prefetcher is composed of three components: (1) Training Unit
that takes the load PC and load address and it maintains the
last observed address in each stream. (2) Physical-to-Structural
Address Mapping Cache (PS-AMC) that stores the mapping
from physical address space to the structural address space
and it is indexed by physical addresses and (3) Structural-to-
Physical Address Mapping Cache (SP-AMC) that stores the
inverse mapping of PS-AMC and it is used for extracting the
correlated addresses in the stream upon a trigger access. For
prediction, each cache access becomes a trigger access, caus-
ing the PS-AMC to retrieve the structural address of the trigger
address. By searching the structural address in SP-AMC, the
prefetcher issues the next addresses with the same structural
address. The training unit in our simulations holds 64 entries
while PS-AMC and SP-AMC contains 1K entries.
SMS: Originally developed for commercial server work-
loads, SMS exploits spatial correlations among data beyond
cache blocks [ 19]. In this method, multiple consecutive blocks
form a spatial region and the ﬁrst access in the region is called
3 We use the same terminology as in [ 8].
the trigger access. Within a time interval, all accesses in the
spatial region are recorded. It uses three tables for training and
predicting the blocks. There is a ﬁlter table that records the spa-
tial region tag, PC and spatial region offset of the trigger access.
Next matching accesses move the spatial patterns from ﬁlter to
accumulation table. Each entry stores the PC and spatial region
offset of the trigger access, and a spatial pattern bit vector indi-
cating which blocks have been accessed during the generation.
At the end of the generation, the spatial pattern is moved to
Pattern History Table (PHT) for further predictions. Upon a
trigger access, SMS consults the PHT for a matching entry and
predicts the blocks within the region that have been recorded
before. We conﬁgured the ﬁlter and accumulation tables to hold
64 entries while the PHT size is inﬁnite (16K entries).
The two most important metrics to evaluate prefetchers are
coverage and overprediction. By deﬁnition, coverage refers to
the fraction of misses that are eliminated by the prefetcher and
overprediction refers to the fraction of prefetched blocks that
are evicted without any access. For an efﬁcient prefetcher, we
expect a high coverage and moderate overprediction; other-
wise, it is considered as inefﬁcient. Figure 2 shows the coverage
and overpredictions for different methods. It is clear that none
of the methods achieve a good coverage for scale-out work-
loads despite that all methods have been previously evaluated
for their class. For example, nearly 90% of misses in libquan-
tum and lbm, which have higher miss rates than scale-outs, are
covered with next-line prefetching. However, it has low cover-
age (10–35%) for scale-out workloads. Moreover, SMS which
has a distinguishable coverage for server workloads (especially
Oracle) has low coverage for most of the scale-out workloads.
For example, in Data Serving , Map Reduce and SAT Solver ,
the coverage is less than 15%. It is interesting to see that for
scale-outs, the simple next-line prefetching has higher cover-
age than complex correlation-based methods. Nonetheless, the
difference it not comparable with traditional workloads. The
situation is worse for other methods (ISB and GHB) in a way
that most of them increase the miss rate by wrongly predicting
future addresses (negative coverage).
We select two of the methods, SMS and GHB PC/DC for
more inspection because on average they operate better than
other methods. Figure 3 shows the coverage and overprediction
of SMS with different spatial region sizes. The numbers in the
second row of x-axis show the total storage cost of SMS with
the given spatial region size and inﬁnite PHT size. While SMS
with 2K regions can cover 40–60% of misses with the overpre-
diction rate less than 20% [ 19], most of the workloads suffer
from low coverages and high overpredictions. In Data Serving,
Map-Reduce, SAT Solver and Media Streaming, the coverages
are less than 30%. Speciﬁcally the coverages of Data Serving
and SAT Solver are less than 15%, while the overpredictions
are 40 and 60%, respectively. Web Search is the only excep-
tion where it has more than 30% coverage and less than 30%
overprediction. Increasing the spatial region size, in order to
capture more blocks, has little impact on the coverages except
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 5 ---
248 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
FIGURE 2. Prefetching coverage shows that neither SMS which has been proposed for server workloads nor other methods which have been
proposed for SPECCPU workloads are efﬁcient for scale-outs. In some cases, the coverage value is negative which means that the prefetcher
increased the miss rate.
FIGURE 3. SMS coverage and overprediction. While SMS with 2K regions covers 30–40% of L1 misses of traditional server workloads, it has
low coverage for Cloudsuite workloads. Furthermore, the overpredictions are high compared with server workloads. The numbers in the second row
of X-axis labels show the total storage cost with the given spatial region size and inﬁnite PHT (16K).
for Map-Reduce where a 20% jump has been observed but at
the same time, the overpredictions increase. At 32K regions,
where 512 blocks are recorded, all workloads suffer from high
overpredictions.
Same metrics for GHB PC/DC are presented in Fig.4. For the
prefetch-friendly application such as libquantum, lbm, soplex
and hmmer, we have observed that GHB with 1K entries cov-
ers 90% of L1 cache misses with roughly 10% overprediction
rate. However, for scale-out workloads, the results are far from
expectation. Surprisingly, SAT Solver has negative coverages
4
with all history sizes. Correspondingly, the overpredictions
4 Negative coverage means that the prefetcher could not eliminate cache
misses; instead, it increased the misses over the baseline architecture.
are high for most of the workloads. By increasing the his-
tory size, the coverage of Map-Reduce decreases. That means
the access patterns change over large history window; hence
the predictions are incorrect and the high overprediction rate
conﬁrms it.
Our observations conﬁrm that the number of issued blocks
in scale-out workloads are less than issued blocks in tradi-
tional workloads. As a result, the low coverages and high
overpredictions are not caused by pollution. Additionally,
when a correlation-based method detects a pattern and issues
some blocks for prefetching, the predicted information are not
totally useless; instead they are used after multiple insertions
and evictions. Applying ﬁltering mechanisms to remove the
overpredictions decrease the opportunity of speculations.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 6 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 249
FIGURE 4. GHB coverage and overprediction. Although GHB covers 90% of L1 misses of a prefetch-friendly application, Libqauntum,i th a s
very low coverage for Cloudsuite workloads. Negative coverage means that the prefetcher increased the number of cache misses compared with
the baseline architecture. Again, the numbers in the second row of X-axis labels show the total storage cost with the given history size.
4. LOCALITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the concepts of temporal and spatial
localities. The purpose is to ﬁnd the differences between scale-
out and other types of workloads. Locality principals are easy
to understand but hard to measure. Some terms such as ‘near
future’, ‘nearby addresses’, ‘high probability’ are general con-
cepts and there is no exact deﬁnition for them.
4.1. Temporal locality
Reuse distance is a popular approach for measuring cache
locality and it has been widely studied since its introduction
[28–32]. By deﬁnition, reuse distance is the number of dis-
tinctive elements accessed between two consecutive uses of
the same element. Figure 5 shows an example and a break-
down of reuse distances. A reuse distance of zero means that
there is no distinctive element between the occurrence of one
element.
Figure 6 shows the breakdown of different ranges for scale-
out and other workloads. The maximum distance in our analysis
has been set to 8192 which resembles a 64KB cache. In Vips,
a vast majority of distances are below 64 but other workloads
exhibit different behaviors. For example, in libquantum,a
great fraction of distances are beyond 8K and in hmmer,t h e
vast majority of distances are between 4K and 8K. Comparing
Cloudsuite workloads with others show that there exists some
similarities between both traditional and server workloads. In
other words, a mix range of reuse distances exists not only in
workloads with high miss rates but also in workloads with low
miss rate such as milc.
The next analysis regarding the temporal aspect is to ﬁnd
out how repeated addresses are distributed in the access stream
regardless of their distances. As an example, assume a sequence
contains {A, B, C, A, C, E, D, B, A}. In this sequence, the ﬁrst
top reused address, A, contributes 33% of total accesses while
FIGURE 5. An example of reuse distance. Note that between the ﬁrst
and second instances of C, there is only one distinct symbol, B, while
it is repeated twice.
FIGURE 6. Scale-out workloads have variable and large reuse dis-
tances. There are also large distances with few repetitions.
second or third top reused addresses, B or C, contributes
22%. As a result, 77% of total repetitions comes from only
3 addresses which we call them top three reused addresses.
For an application with good temporal locality, we expect a
high repetition weight in few addresses. Implicitly that means,
addresses are repeated in the sequence with high probability.
Figure 7 shows the result of this analysis where the X-axis
show top 20 reused addresses in descending order. For example,
the index of 1 means the contribution of the ﬁrst top reused
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 7 ---
250 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
address and the index of 2 means the cumulative contribu-
tion of ﬁrst and second top reused addresses. Because of the
logarithmic growth of contributions and to better show the
results, we prefer to show the top 20 reused addresses. In Vips,
nearly 80% of repetitions comes from only twenty addresses.
Some traditional workloads have less contribution than Cloud-
suite workloads. Speciﬁcally, hmmer has very low contribution
which means addresses repeat few times. In the scale-out
FIGURE 7. Distribution of repeated addresses. Addresses in most of
the Cloudsuite workloads have low repetitions compare to Vips.I ti s
interesting to see that although libquantum has higher miss ratio than
Cloudsuite workloads, addresses are more repetitive.
workloads, the top 20 reused addresses contribute less than
30% in all workloads. Speciﬁcally, Web Search and Media
Streaming have very poor contributions. Although libquantum
has the highest miss rate among selected workloads, top 20
reused addresses contribute more than most of the scale-out
workloads.
From the two analyses it can be seen that these workloads
exhibit repetitions in their access sequences; however, there
are a large set of addresses with small repetitions and the rep-
etitions repeat in large and variable distances. Such features
can clarify why address correlation methods fail to predict
correctly. The methods can predict a future address but most
of the time the prediction is incorrect because the addresses
have few repetitions. To make it more clear, assume S1 con-
tains {A, A, A, B, B, B} and S2 contains {A, A, B, B, C, C}.B o t h
of them have repetitions but S2 contains more distinctive
addresses which result in fewer repetitions. As a result, it is
harder to predict future accesses for S2.
4.2. Spatial locality
Spatial locality refers to the high probability of access to
nearby locations of X upon an access to X . The concept is
easy to understand but there is no unique and standard method
for the measurements. Therefore, every analysis leaves some
corners uncovered. In our methodology, we only focus on
consecutive accesses which is able to explain some key and
basic features. To measure it for N accesses and block size of
B bytes, a counter, C, increments whenever M consecutive
addresses map to the same block. The degree of spatiality is
then deﬁned as C/(N − 1). As an example, assume a memory
sequence of {A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6} where each address maps
to {B0, B0, B1, B2, B2, B2}. Assuming that M = 2, the counter
is incremented for (B0, B0), (B2, B2) and (B2, B2). As a result,
the degree of spatiality is 60%.
Figure 8 shows the spatial locality with different conﬁgu-
rations. Each row shows the spatial locality for two and three
consecutive accesses to model the locality. For each conﬁgu-
ration, the block size is varied from 16B to 8KB. Cloudsuite
FIGURE 8. Measuring spatial locality of applications by changing the block size. Interestingly, most Cloudsuite workloads have higher spatial
locality than conventional workloads. It is even higher for small block sizes.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 8 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 251
workloads generally have higher degree of spatiality. Such
feature is also seen in traditional server workloads but SPEC
workloads have different behaviors. For example, lbm and
libquantum have higher spatial locality than soplex and hmmer
but at the same time, they have higher miss rates. Two work-
loads, soplex and hmmer, have the least degree of spatial locality
although they have nearly the same miss rates compared with
scale-out and server workloads.
From the locality analyses, we see that the some cache-
friendly applications such as Vips beneﬁts from temporal
locality while milc beneﬁts from spatial locality. Some of the
prefetch-friendly applications suffers from both low temporal
and spatial localities. They also have reuse distances, to some
extent, similar to scale-out workloads. In Cloudsuite, address
repetitions are low and when a correlation-based prefetcher
predicts a new address, there is low probability for reusing
that. Such behavior has been observed in SMS where it has low
coverage for scale-outs although it primarily exploits spatial
features.
Problem with reuse distance analysis is that the results can
be veriﬁed with measuring the cache miss rates. In other words,
reuse distance analysis shows that scale-out workloads have
larger distances than Vips and smaller distances than libquan-
tum. The reuse distances are also similar to server workloads.
In fact, the measurements in Table 2 show that these workloads
have misrates higher than Vips and lower than libquantum and
similar to server workloads. The question that locality analy-
ses are unable to answer is how cache misses are repeated in
the stream. While address repetition is a software issue, miss
repetition is a hardware issue which depends on the structure
of cache. As a result, more in-depth analyses are required to
determine how misses are repeated.
5. CACHE MISS ANALYSIS
In this part, we focus on cache misses where the repetitiveness
of misses are explained. The observations are summarized at the
end of this chapter to explain why data prefetching is hard in
scale-out workloads.
5.1. Space dimension
In this section, we try to answer the question on how misses are
repeatable? In other words, do they happen regularly to form
patterns? To ﬁnd it out, memory space is divided into relatively
large chunks by increasing the block size from 64B to 8KB
which is equal to one page. For each incoming miss, the tag is
calculated by masking the lower 13 bits. If the tag number is
new, a logical region number is assigned to it. Otherwise, the
previously recorded region number is used. Finally, by plotting
the region numbers based on the order of the misses in time,
it is possible to view the recurring miss patterns. Figure 9a
shows an example of this analysis where the memory space is
(a) (b) (c)
FIGURE 9. Example: analyzing the repetition of misses. (a) Mem-
ory space is divided in to equal chunks. (b) New misses are assigned
a logical number and (c) region numbers are plotted in the order of
misses. Misses that belong to the same PC, have similar color. Horizon-
tal lines show how misses repeat in regions. As a result, patterns can be
detected.
divided in to 8KB regions and the order of incoming misses
are marked as Mi. Figure 9b shows how a region number is
assigned to each miss. R0, R1 and R2 are assigned to M0, M1
and M2, respectively, since have new tags. For the next miss,
M3, the tag number has been recorded before, so R1 is assigned
to M3. The process continues for all misses and in Fig. 9c, the
data points are plotted with X-axis denoting the miss numbers
and the Y -axis denoting the region numbers. Since, each miss
has a PC, we assign a color to misses with the same PC. This
is useful to identify whether PC stream create regular miss
patterns or not. In general, with horizontal lines it is possi-
ble to identify reused regions. Since the region numbers are
assigned to new incoming misses only, the ﬁnal plot has a
triangular shape.
The result of this analysis for scale-out and traditional work-
loads are shown in Figs 10 and 11, respectively. Since the
number of PCs are large in the traces, we only colorized the
top 10 reused PCs. Speciﬁcally, misses for top reused PC is
shown in red.
Figure 10 shows the result of this analysis for scale-out
workloads and for each chart, a region is magniﬁed. Data Serv-
ing has recurring patterns but there are a lot of noises that make
the patterns hard to detect. Map Reduce , on the other hand,
has patterns but magnifying the patterns shows that they are
complex. Because of such patterns, a large history should be
used in order to track the history. As shown in Fig. 3,a tl a r g e
memory regions, SMS is able to cover a fraction of misses.
Unlike the ﬁrst two workloads, other scale-outs contain ran-
dom misses. Figure 11 shows the the result of this analysis
on traditional workloads. Note that we ignored Vips because
it has very low number of misses. Most of the SPEC work-
loads, such as libquantum, lbm, milc and hmmer, have simple
recurring patterns. Speciﬁcally, most of the misses in lbm and
libquantum and, to some extent, soplex are caused by few PCs.
Oracle has some short recurring patterns which is why SMS
has the best coverage among other prefetchers. Nonetheless,
Apache has a behavior similar to Web-related workloads in
Cloudsuite.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 9 ---
252 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
FIGURE 10. Repetition of misses of scale-out workloads. We can ﬁnd recurring patterns of misses in some applications, like Data Serving and
Map Reduce but patterns are complex. Recurring misses in other workloads are irregular so it is hard to ﬁnd patterns in the history.
5.2. Time dimension
We use the Sequitur hierarchical data compression algo-
rithm [ 33] to identify temporal repetitions in miss sequences.
Sequitur builds a grammar whose production rules correspond
to repetitions in its input. Each production rule assigns a label
to a sequence of symbols and other rule labels. By reading one
symbol at a time, Sequitur incrementally extends the gram-
mar’s root production rule. As each symbol is appended, the
grammar is modiﬁed to create new production rules that cap-
ture any new repetition the appended symbol creates. As the
grammar grows, Sequitur maintains two constraints. First, no
pair of symbols are adjacent more than once in the grammar.
Second, every production rule in the grammar (except the root
rule) is used more than once.
The primary goal of the Sequitur miss repetition analysis is
to establish an upper bound for the opportunity to eliminate
repetitive miss sequences via address correlation prefetching
methods. We use the following categorization: non-repetitive:
misses that do not recur; new: the ﬁrst occurrence of a repetitive
sequence; head: the ﬁrst element in subsequent occurrences;
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 10 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 253
FIGURE 11. Repetition of misses in traditional workloads. SPEC workloads have simple recurring patterns except soplex. Also most of the misses
belong to certain PCs. In server workloads, Oracle also have recurring patterns which are detectable.
and opportunity: non-head elements in repetitive occurrences
of a sequence. Figure 12 shows a sequence with the correspond-
ing Sequitur grammar. Since four symbols, p, q, r and s occur
only in the root rule, they are considered as non-repetitive. The
ﬁrst occurrence of other symbols, w, x, y and z in the rules are
classiﬁed as new. To ﬁnd the head symbols, we have to ﬁnd the
ﬁrst terminal symbol of all the previously encountered repeats
among all possibilities. Therefore, the second occurrence of
x and w are classiﬁed as heads. All other remaining symbols
are then considered as opportunity.
Figure 13 shows the result of sequitur analysis for the
workloads. Generally in Cloudsuite applications, except Map
Reduce, there are little opportunities for eliminating repetitive
misses (less than 50%). However, traditional server work-
loads have high opportunities (85% for Oracle and 60% for
Apache). SPEC workloads have different behavior in a way
that there are high opportunities to eliminate recurring misses
in libquantum and hmmer although they have higher miss rates
than Cloudsuite workloads. These workloads also have strong
and predictable miss patterns in space dimension (Fig. 11).
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 11 ---
254 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
The opportunity in lbm is very low; however, this workload
has predictable miss patterns in space (Fig. 11). In soplex,t h e
opportunity for temporal recurring misses is less than 50%
FIGURE 12. Example of Sequitur. A grammar is built from the
sequence and the repetition of rules shows an opportunity to eliminate
recurring misses.
FIGURE 13. Sequitur analysis for workloads. In contrast to server
workloads, a large fraction of misses in Cloudsuite workloads, except
Map Reduce , are non-repetitive. Therefore, the opportunity to ﬁnd
repetitive miss patterns is low.
and spatial miss patterns are more predictable than Cloudsuite
workloads.
5.3. Delta analysis
In this part, we analyze consecutive deltas for cache misses. The
purpose of this analysis is to ﬁnd outinter-block and intra-block
transitions that lead to either cache hit or miss. Assume the block
size is 64B which means that addresses in the range from 0 to 63
map to the ﬁrst block, addresses in the range of 64 to 127 map
to the second block, and so on. Now assume that there are two
consecutive accesses to address 10 and address 11. That means
the delta of 1 results in a hit because addresses 10 and 11 map
to the ﬁrst block. However, two consecutive accesses to 63 and
64 (delta is 1) results in a miss. Therefore, a delta may result in
hit or miss. In cache-friendly applications, it is expected that a
few percent of frequently repeated deltas result in cache miss.
To ﬁnd the frequently repeated deltas, all deltas are sorted in a
list based on their repetitions in descending order. As a result, the
ﬁrst entry is a delta with the highest repetition score and the last
entry is a delta with the lowest repetition score.
Figure 14a shows an example which is related to cache-
friendly applications. Mostly reused delta which is 2, repeats
six time and only one of its occurrences results in a miss. A
delta of four repeats four times and all of its occurrences result
in hits. Each of the two least repeated deltas, e.g. 10 and 3,
repeats three times an results in a miss. Plotting the miss ratios
based on the order of repeated deltas (and not their values)
shows that the concentration of data points is on low miss
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 14. Effect of top reused deltas on cache misses. (a) An example to show that in cache-friendly applications, top reused deltas mostly hit
in cache and (b) the result for Vips and Milc.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 12 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 255
FIGURE 15. Effect of top reused deltas on cache misses for prefetch-friendly applications. Since delta values frequently repeat, they converge
quickly. Therefore, delta-based prefetcher are able to ﬁnd and match patterns.
FIGURE 16. Effect of top reused deltas on cache misses in some non-cache-friendly applications. The results for most of the modern workloads
show that the convergence takes place far beyond the limit.
ratios. Evaluating cache-friendly workloads, Vips and Milc,
with low miss rates shows that the concentration is on low miss
ratios as expected (Fig. 14b).
However, not all applications are cache-friendly. Assume that
the most frequent delta is repeatedm times. Then, the number of
misses is variable between 0 tom. For a large value ofm,t h em i s s
ratio takes any arbitrarily number between 0 and 100%. Mov-
ing toward the less repeated deltas, the number of possible miss
ratios decreases. For example, the miss ratio of a delta which
repeats four times can be either 0, 25, 50, 75 or 100%. Simi-
larly, the miss ratio of a delta which repeats three times can be
0, 33, 66 or 100% and the miss ratio of a delta which repeats
twice can be 0, 50 or 100%. Therefore, there exists a conver-
gence as we move to the least repeated deltas. If such a conver-
gence occurs quickly, that means deltas are highly repeatable.
Otherwise, there is a large volume of deltas with few repetitions.
An example of such behavior is presented in Fig. 15.M o s to f
the deltas frequently repeat, and hence they quickly converge.
Applications with this property are suitable for delta-based
prefetchers (e.g. GHB PC/DC or stride prefetcher) because with
a limited storage, it is possible to track recurring deltas. The
result of this analysis on Libquantum, Hmmer and Lbm shows
that the convergence takes place within a given number of
deltas.
5 Also, the coverage of GHB PC/DC for these workloads
conﬁrms that they are suitable for delta-based prefetchers. Data
Serving from the Cloudsuite is to some extent similar to SPEC
workloads. However, the convergence occurs beyond the 100K
limit and the result of GHB PC/DC conﬁrms that it works better
than other history-based prefetchers.
Figure 16 shows the results of this analysis on other work-
loads. As can be seen in web-related workloads (Web Frontend,
Web Search and Apache), Media Streaming and Oracle,t h e
convergence takes place far beyond the 100K limit. That means
there are a large number of deltas with few repetitions. Map
Reduce and SAT Solver from Cloudsuite have random and
5 To better illustrate the results, we limit the horizontal axis to 100K most
frequent deltas.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 13 ---
256 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
unstructured shapes and the coverage of GHB PC/DC shows
delta-based prefetchers are not able to ﬁnd delta patterns of
these workloads. Although Soplex from SPEC CPU has an
unstructured shape, the number of repeated deltas is high and
the concentration is on low miss ratios.
As a summary, by comparing modern workloads with tradi-
tional SPEC workloads, we see that they have a huge number of
distinct delta values. Therefore, a history-based prefetcher that
tracks delta values has to store a large volume of deltas to ﬁnd
a recurring pattern which means a large table should be incor-
porated. Additionally, delta values randomly hit or miss in the
cache which cause the prefetcher to incorrectly ﬁnd matching
patterns in the history and mispredict future addresses.
6. ENERGY ASPECTS
Apart from static energy which is consumed by the on-chip
storages in a prefetcher, it consumes dynamic energy due to
accessing lower levels of memory hierarchy. Fact is, every
prefetch message is considered as load request, so it is issued
to the lower memory levels to bring the data back to the L1
but it is not delivered to the pipeline. Analyses using CACTI
and McPA T show that components in lower levels including
last-level cache (LLC) slices, routers, directories and main
TABLE 3. Average coverage and increase in memory
request for scale-out workloads.
Coverage (%) Memory requests (%)
NLP 24.16 83.28
Stream (med) 13.03 90.69
GHB (PC/DC) 9.2 92.28
ISB − 5.4 92.4
SMS 19.5 33.9
memory dissipate energies approximately 10×,1 5×,1 . 2× and
100× the L1 data cache, respectively.
With the poor coverages achieved, this is an important prob-
lem. Table 3 shows a brief survey on the increase in memory
requests. Note that for each prefetching method and workload,
we count the number of memory requests due to the demand
misses, i.e. misses caused by load instructions, and prefetch
requests. Then, we normalized the value to the baseline archi-
tecture with no prefetcher. Finally, we calculated the average
number of memory requests over the scale-out workloads. As
can be seen, the increase in the memory requests are much
higher than the coverages. Therefore, using prefetchers is not
energy efﬁcient.
7. RELATED WORK
To our best knowledge, no data prefetcher has been proposed
speciﬁcally for modern workloads which tries to hide the miss
latency at L1 data cache. We claim that this is the ﬁrst work that
evaluates the in-depth aspects of L1 data cache for emerging
cloud and big data workloads. Table 4 shows a summary of
related works with the scopes and workloads that have been
used in their evaluations. Nearly all data prefetching proposals
in recent years are dedicated to traditional desktop workloads
(namely SPEC CPU suite). There are some limited works on
traditional and commercial server workloads, e.g. OLTP and
web applications. Additionally, there are few number of works
on instruction prefetching for emerging cloud workloads. As
mentioned before, recent data prefetching proposals evaluate
their algorithms with Cloudsuite. Ferdman [ 21] also showed
that disabling built-in next-line prefetcher which is available
in commercial processors does not degrade the performance
for Cloudsuite. Pugsley [ 17] have also evaluated sandbox
prefetching for multi-program sets of SPEC CPU and Cloud-
suite workloads at the last-level-cache. Their results conﬁrm
that the prefetcher performance is negligible for Cloudsuite
TABLE 4. Related works to prefetching and locality analysis, their scope and workloads used in their evaluation. Most of the works on cache
including locality and data prefetching methods are done for traditional workloads.
Related work Scope Workloads used
Next-line [3], Stride [ 6], AMPM [ 10], GHB [ 4], Markov [ 7], FDP [ 8], ISB [ 18],
stream [27], Palacharla’s adaptive prefetcher [ 26]
Data prefetcher SPEC CPU
STeMS [20], SMS [ 19], TMS [ 36] Data prefetcher Traditional servers
PIF [37], SHIFT [ 38] Instruction prefetcher Traditional servers and
cloud
Locality analysis using reuse distance [ 39], Predicting whole-program locality [ 29],
Cache management policies with reuse distances [ 30], Optimal multicore cache
hierarchies via reuse distances [ 31], Cache replacement with reuse distances [ 32],
Temporal and Spatial locality measurements [ 34], Locality measurements for
HPC [35], Component model of spatial locality [ 40]
Locality analyses SPEC CPU and HPC
Sandbox [17], Clearing the clouds [ 21] Data prefetcher SPEC CPU and cloud
(partially)
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 14 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 257
workloads compared with traditional SPEC CPU workloads.
None of these works discuses on why prefetchers fail to increase
the performance of modern workloads. Also, they have not
justiﬁed why the used prefetcher (next-line or sandbox) has no
impact on the performance.
Evaluating prefetching methods and their feasibility are
partially done for HPC workloads. Lee [ 15] have studied why
prefetching does not work for some of the engineering work-
loads (SPEC CPU) by explaining part of the source codes that
make the access patterns irregular.
The principal of locality has long been a fundamental research
subject but most of the related works in this subject try to eval-
uate the locality principal for HPC applications to group them
and estimate the miss rates with probabilistic methods. How-
ever, this work is orthogonal to them since we know the miss
ratios of modern workloads.
Dummler [ 34] have extended the spatial locality measure-
ment to make a platform independent decision. As a result, a
more accurate prediction on miss rates are possible especially
for HPC applications. The extension basically considers the
accesses to physical neighboring memory locations. Y u [ 35]
have proposed a new metric, miss bandwidth, to measure both
temporal and spatial localities for HPC applications. Miss
bandwidth reﬂects the amount of memory trafﬁc generated
by misses of a fully associative cache. With a good temporal
locality, the miss bandwidth decreases rapidly as a function of
cache size. Similarly, if the miss bandwidth is increased by a
factor of cache line size, that means the program features poor
spatial locality.
Gu [ 40] have proposed a component-based model for spa-
tial locality of SPEC CPU2000 applications by measuring
the changes of reuse distance as a function of data block size.
The spatial locality score is then built from a reuse signature
and tracking the reuse distance. Similarly, locality analysis
for predicting the behavior is done in [ 29, 39]. Reuse distance
does not model the repetitions accurately because two different
addresses may have the same reuse distance.
In [ 41], the authors have studied the temporal address cor-
relation in commercial server workloads. Unlike temporal
locality which considers the repetition of one address, tem-
poral correlation deals with a group of shared addresses that
tend to be accessed together in the same order. It has been
shown that this feature exists and there are opportunities to
hide the memory latency by prefetching future blocks. In a
similar work [ 36], they have used Sequitur, a hierarchical data
compression algorithm to identify the repetitive subsequences
within the miss traces.
8. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
This paper was studied cloud workloads to show that unlike
traditional workloads, prefetching methods are neither effec-
tive for hiding memory latency nor efﬁcient for saving energy
FIGURE 17. Contrary to traditional server and desktop workloads,
emerging cloud workloads have irregular miss pattern over the mem-
ory space and the opportunity to ﬁnd recurring miss patterns over the
time is low.
for such workloads. Results showed that although there exists a
number of traditional workloads that have higher miss rates than
modern workloads, prefetchers fail to correctly predict future
data accesses and most of the prefetched blocks are evicted
from the cache without any use. The summary of this study can
be seen in Fig. 17. Traditional desktop and engineering work-
loads (SPEC CPU) have either high temporal and spatial miss
patterns or predictable spatial miss patterns when the oppor-
tunity to remove repetitive misses is low. In order to increase
the performance of caches, one has to incorporate very large
on-chip caches to capture the accesses. This is not a practical
solution since in spite of technological limitations on putting
a large cache on-chip (due to area and power constraints), the
access latency is increased. Manufacturers, as shown in Fig. 1,
tend to use small caches to keep access latency as low as pos-
sible and at the same time they use data prefetchers (shown to
be useful for traditional workloads) to compensate incurred
misses. Our analysis showed that state-of-the-art prefetchers
make incorrect predictions because they are tracking a small
regions (a small L1 cache window which monitors memory
accesses temporally and spatially). Therefore, in order to design
a prefetcher for modern workloads, it has to be able to track
long term accesses without losing the accuracy by dismissing
short-term accesses. Such a prefetcher needs a large storage
which is again not practical with today’s technology. For this
reason and to reduce energy consumption due to superﬂuous
accesses to the lower levels of memory hierarchy, commercial
processors targeting cloud and big data workloads should not
use data prefetchers. Although the focus of this paper was the
L1 data cache, we are studying miss patterns in other cache
types, e.g. L2 and L3 caches, along with software code models
to ﬁgure out the opportunities for prefetching at other levels.
REFERENCES
[1] Callahan, D., Kennedy, K. and Porterﬁeld, A. (1991) Software
Prefetching. Proceedings of Architectural Support for Program-
ming Languages and Operating Systems , Santa Clara, USA,
April 8–11, pp. 40–52. ACM, New Y ork.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 15 ---
258 M. Naderan-Tahan and H. Sarbazi-Azad
[2] Klaiber, A. C. and Levy, H. M. (1991) An Architecture for
Software-controlled Data Prefetching. Proceedings Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture , Toronto, Canada,
May 27–30, pp. 43–53. ACM, New Y ork.
[3] Smith, A. J. (1982) Cache memories. ACM Comput. Surveys, 14,
473–530.
[4] Nesbit, K. J. and Smith, J. E. (2004) Data Cache Prefetching
using a Global History Buffer. Proceedings International Sym-
posium on High Performance Computer Architecture ,M a d r i d ,
Spain, February 14–18, pp. 96–106. IEEE, Washington DC.
[5] Nesbit, K. J., Dhodapkar, S. and Smith, J. E. (2004) Ac/dc: An
Adaptive Data Cache Prefetcher. Proceedings of International
Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Tech-
niques, Antibes Juan-les-Pins, France, September 29–Octpber
3, pp. 135–145. IEEE, Washington DC.
[6] Baer, J.-L. and Chen, T.-F. (1995) Effective hardware-based data
prefetching for high-performance processors. IEEE Trans. Com-
put., 44, 609–623.
[7] Joseph, D. and Grunwald, D. (1997) Prefetching using Markov
Predictors. Proceedings of International Symposium on Com-
puter Architecture, Denver, USA, June 2–4, pp. 252–263. ACM,
New Y ork.
[8] Srinath, S., Mutlu, O., Kim, H. and Patt, Y . N. (2007) Feed-
back Directed Prefetching: Improving the Performance and
Bandwidth-efﬁciency of Hardware Prefetchers. Proceedings
of International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture, Phoenix, USA, February 10–14, pp. 63–74. IEEE,
Washington DC.
[9] Perez, D. G ., Mouchard, G . and Temam, O. (2004) Microlib:
A Case for the Quantitative Comparison of Micro-architecture
Mechanisms. Proceedings of International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, Portland, USA, December 4–8, pp. 43–54.
IEEE, Washington DC.
[10] Ishii, Y ., Inaba, M. and Hiraki, K. (2009) Access Map Pattern
Matching for Data Cache Prefetch. Proceedings of International
Conference on Supercomputing , Y orktown Heights, USA, June
8–12, pp. 499–500. ACM, New Y ork.
[11] Ebrahimi, E., Mutlu, O., Lee, C. J. and Patt, Y . N. (2009) Coor-
dinated Control of Multiple Prefetchers in Multi-core Systems.
Proceedings of International Symposium on Microarchitecture ,
New Y ork, USA, December 12–16, pp. 316–326. IEEE, Wash-
ington DC.
[12] Ebrahim, E., Lee, C. J., Mutlu, O. and Patt, Y . N. (2011)
Prefetch-aware Shared Resource Management for Multi-core
Systems. Proceedings of International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, San Jose, USA, June 4–8, pp. 141–152. ACM,
New Y ork.
[13] Lee, C. J., Narasiman, V ., Mutlu, O. and Patt, Y . N. (2009)
Improving Memory Bank-level Parallelism in the Presence
of Prefetching. Proceedings of International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, New Y ork, USA, December 12-16, pp. 327–
336. IEEE, Washington DC.
[14] Ebrahmi, E., Mutlu, O. and Patt, Y . N. (2009) Techniques for
Bandwidth-efﬁcient Prefetching of Linked Data Structures in
Hybrid Prefetching Systems. Proceedings of International Sym-
posium on High Performance Computer Architecture , Raleigh,
USA, February 14–18, pp. 7–17. IEEE, Washington DC.
[15] Lee, J., Kim, H. and Vuduc, R. (2012) When prefetching works,
when it does not, and why. ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim. , 9,
2:1–2:29.
[16] Lee, C. J., Mutlu, O., Narasiman, V . and Patt, Y . N. (2011)
Prefetch-aware memory controllers. IEEE Trans. Comput. , 60,
1406–1430.
[17] Pugsley, S. H., Chishti, Z., Wilkerson, C., Chuang, P .-F., Scott,
R. L. and Jaleel, A. (2014) Sandbox Prefetching: Safe, Run-time
Evaluation of Aggressive Prefetchers. Proceedings of Interna-
tional Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture,
Orlando, USA, February 15–19, pp. 626–637. IEEE, Washington
DC.
[18] Jain, A. and Lin, C. (2013) Linearizing Irregular Memory
Accesses for Improved Correlated Prefetching. Proceedings of
International Symposium on Microarchitecture , Davis, USA,
December 7–11, pp. 247–259. ACM, New Y ork.
[19] Somogyi, S., Wenisch, T. F., Ailamaki, A., Falsaﬁ, B. and
Moshovos, A. (2006) Spatial Memory Streaming. Proceedings
of International Symposium on Computer Architecture , Boston,
USA, June 17–21, pp. 252–263. IEEE, Washington DC.
[20] Somogyi, S., Wenisch, T. F., Ailamaki, A. and Falsaﬁ, B. (2009)
Spatio-temporal Memory Streaming. Proceedings International
Symposium on Computer Architecture, Austin, USA, June 20–24,
pp. 69–80. ACM, New Y ork.
[21] Ferdman, M., Adileh, A., Kocberber, O., V olos, S., Alisafaee, M.,
Jevdjic, D., Kaynak, C., Popescu, A. D., Ailamaki, A. and Fal-
saﬁ, B. (2012) Clearing the Clouds: A Study of Emerging Scale-
out Workloads on Modern Hardware. Proceedings of Architec-
tural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Sys-
tems, London, UK, March 3–7, pp. 37–48. ACM, New Y ork.
[22] Hardavellas, N., Somogyi, S., Wenisch, T. F., Wunderlich, E.,
Chen, S., Kim, J., Falsaﬁ, B., Hoe, J. C. and Nowatzyk, A. G .
(2004) Simﬂex: a fast, accurate, ﬂexible full-system simulation
framework for performance evaluation of server architecture.
ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev. , 31, 31–34.
[23] Biena, C., Kumar, S., Singh, J. P . and Li, K. (2008) The PARSEC
Benchmark Suite: Characterization and Architectural Impli-
cations. Proceedings of International Conference on Parallel
Architectures and Compilation Techniques , Toronto, Canada,
October 25–29, pp. 72–81. ACM, New Y ork.
[24] Henning, J. L. (2006) Spec cpu2006 benchmark descriptions.
ACM SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News , 34, 1–17.
[25] Tendler, J. M., Dodson, J. S., Fields, J. S., Le, H. and Sinharoy,
B. (2002) Power4 system microarchitecture.IBM J. Res. Dev., 46,
5–25.
[26] Palacharla, S. and Kessler, R. E. (1994) Evaluating Stream
Buffers as a Secondary Cache Replacement. Proceedings of
International Symposium on Computer Architecture , Chicago,
USA, April 18–21, pp. 24–33. IEEE Computer Society Press,
Los Alamitos, CA.
[27] Jouppi, N. P . (1990) Improving Direct-mapped Cache Perfor-
mance by the Addition of a Small Fully-associative Cache and
Prefetch Buffers. Proceedings of International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, Seattle, USA, May 28–31, pp. 364–373.
ACM, New Y ork.
[28] Mattson, R. L., Gecsei, J., Slutz, D. R. and Traiger, I. L. (1970)
Evaluation techniques for storage hierarchies. IBM Syst. J. , 9,
78–117.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026


--- PAGE 16 ---
Why Does Data Prefetching Not Work for Modern Workloads? 259
[29] Ding, C. and Zhong, Y . (2003) Predicting Whole-program
Locality through Reuse Distance Analysis. Proceedings of
SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation, San Diego, CA, June 9–11, pp. 245–257. ACM,
New Y ork.
[30] Duong, N., Zhao, D., Kim, T., Cammarota, R., V alero, M.
and V eidenbaum, A. V . (2012) Improving Cache Management
Policies using Dynamic Reuse Distances. Proceedings of Inter-
national Symposium on Microarchitecture , V ancouver, Canada,
December 1–5, pp. 389–400. IEEE, Washington DC.
[31] Wu, M. J. and Y eung, D. (2012) Identifying Optimal Multicore
Cache Hierarchies for Loop-based Parallel Programs Via Reuse
Distance Analysis. Proceedings of SIGPLAN Workshop on Mem-
ory Systems Performance and Correctness , Beijing, China, June
11–16, pp. 2–11. ACM, New Y ork.
[32] Keramidas, G ., Petoumenos, P . and Kaxiras, S. (2007) Cache
Replacement based on Reuse-distance Prediction. Proceedings
of International Conference on Computer Design , Lake Tahoe,
USA, October 7–10, pp. 245–250. ACM, New Y ork.
[33] Nevill-Manning, C. G . and Witten, I. H. (1997) Identifying hier-
archical structure in sequences: a linear-time algorithm. J. Artif.
Intell. Res., 7, 67–82.
[34] Dummler, J., Rauber, T. and Runger, G . (2006) Combining Mea-
sures for Temporal and Spatial Locality. Proceedings of Inter-
national Conference Frontiers of High Performance Computing
and Networking , Sorrento, Italy, December 4–7, pp. 697–706.
Springer, Berlin.
[35] DCS-R-2005-2564 (2005) A New Locality Metric and Case Stud-
ies for HPCS Benchmark . University of Illinois, Urbana Cham-
pagne, Champaign, IL.
[36] Wenisch, T. F., Ferdman, M., Ailamaki, A., Falsaﬁ, B. and
Moshovos, A. (2008) Temporal Streams in Commercial Server
Applications. Proceedings of International Symposium on
Workload Characterization , Seattle, USA, September 14–16,
pp. 99–108. IEEE, Washington DC.
[37] Ferdman, M., Kaynak, C. and Falsaﬁ, B. (2011) Proactive
Instruction Fetch. Proceedings of International Symposium
on Microarchitecture , Porto Alegre, Brazil, December 4–7,
pp. 152–162. ACM, New Y ork.
[38] Kaynak, C., Grot, B. and Falsaﬁ, B. (2013) Shift: Shared History
Instruction Fetch for Lean-core Server Processors. Proceedings
of International Symposium on Microarchitecture , Davis, USA,
December 7–11, pp. 272–283. ACM, New Y ork.
[39] Zhong, Y ., Shen, X. and Ding, C. (2009) Program locality anal-
ysis using reuse distance. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 31,
20:1–20:39.
[40] Gu, X., Christopher, I., Bai, T., Zhang, C. and Ding, C. (2009)
A Component Model of Spatial Locality. Proceedings of Inter-
national Symposium on Memory Management , Dublin, Ireland,
June 19–20, pp. 99–108. ACM, New Y ork.
[41] Wenisch, T. F., Somogyi, S., Hardavellas, N., Kim, J., Ailamaki,
A. and Falsaﬁ, B. (2005) Temporal Streaming of Shared Memory.
Proceedings of International Symposium on Computer Architec-
ture, Madison, USA, June 4–8, pp. 222–233. ACM, New Y ork.
Section B: Computer and Communications Networks and Systems
The Computer Journal, V ol.59 No. 2, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comjnl/article/59/2/244/2568684 by SLUB Dresden user on 04 May 2026

